






For Water Protectors Everywhere MNI WICONI!





Contents




Author’s Note



INTRODUCTION



CHAPTER ONE




CHAPTER TWO

The Standing Rock Saga


Environmental Justice Theory and Its Limitations for Indigenous Peoples


Genocide by Any Other Name
A History of Indigenous Environmental Injustice




CHAPTER THREE




CHAPTER FOUR




CHAPTER FIVE





CHAPTER SIX




CHAPTER SEVEN

The Complicated Legacy of Western Expansion and the Industrial Revolution


Food Is Medicine, Water Is Life
American Indian Health and the Environment


(Not So) Strange Bedfellows
Indian Country’s Ambivalent Relationship with the Environmental Movement


Hearts Not on the Ground
Indigenous Women’s Leadership and More Cultural Clashes


Sacred Sites and Environmental Justice

CHAPTER EIGHT	Ways Forward for Environmental Justice in Indian Country


Acknowledgments

Notes

Selected Bibliography

Index





Author’s Note




Books are born for many reasons. This one emerged as a result of many years of research and activism, which for me has always focused on environmentalism, Native sovereignty, and their intersection. If what the preeminent Indian law scholar Felix Cohen said was true, that Indians are the United States’ miner’s canary  that signals the poison gas of the political atmosphere, to extend the metaphor,  then in the  larger  world dominated by  the  fossil  fuel  industry  all humans have become the miner’s canary. On a planet with a rapidly changing climate and undergoing what many scientists believe is the Earth’s sixth mass extinction,  the  future  of  humanity  is  looking  about  as  bright  as  it  did  for American Indians in 1953 when Cohen wrote those words railing against federal Indian policy  (known as termination, which was every  bit as menacing  as it sounded). From an American Indian perspective, we’re all on the reservation now.
In the past few decades it has become crystal clear that, as “the people,” our common enemy is the entrenched corporate power of Big Oil and other toxic industries that buy  political influence to protect their own corrupt interests in collusion with government, all in the name of democracy. This has come at the expense of countless marginalized people worldwide. In the US, that has always meant Indigenous people, other people of color, and those having low incomes. The overall goal of this book is to highlight the importance of building alliances across social and racial divides. To do this requires an honest interrogation of the history  of the relationships between the environmental movement and Indian country.
In my years of research and writing on American Indian environmental justice (EJ), I have observed two locations where those conversations predominantly occur: in academia and in activist spaces. By “activist spaces,” I am referring to points  of  contact  between  activist  groups  (such  as  spontaneous  actions  or movements,  coalitions,  and  nonprofits),  governmental  agencies  in  charge  of implementing environmental policies, and business interests those policies may or may not regulate in the process of development. Academics in environmental studies, Native studies, and other disciplines educate students on the histories

and principles  of  EJ  in different  EJ  communities,  but  they  face  a  dearth of literature from which to teach on the topic relative to Indigenous peoples. A similar  lack  of  knowledge  exists  within  governmental  and  nongovernmental institutions and businesses. People in these organizations might have access to lawyers trained in federal Indian law, but law is only one aspect of the EJ world, especially when it comes to Indian country, not to mention the fact that federal Indian  law  is  a  creation  of  colonial  forces  and  not  particularly  designed  to deliver justice to Indian people. Lawyers with expertise in federal Indian law often are also neither versed in environmental justice history or principles nor are aware of other critical work by historians and other academics that inform EJ praxis (that is, the way EJ is imagined and implemented).
American  Indian  activists   doing   EJ   work,   however,   tend  to  be   quite knowledgeable  about  the  issues  they  are  working  for  and  the  histories  that inform those issues. As a result, they inevitably end up having to educate, with no  additional  financial  compensation,  the  various  groups  they  interact  with, people with whom they often have contentious relationships to begin with. This points to an in-between space in Indigenous environmental justice organizing, where there is a need for education that helps build the foundation for productive relationships.  Thus,  a  primary  goal  of  this  book  is  to  help  fill  that  gap  by providing a broad overview about what environmental injustice is for American Indians, describing what justice looks like, and proposing avenues to get there. The only book of its kind to date, my hope is that it will be used not only in classrooms  but  also  by  every  organization,  institution,  and  individual  that engages with Indigenous peoples on the protection of the environment and their rights within it.


NOTE ON TERMINOLOGY
There are numerous terms used to describe and define American Indian people. Some are more accurate or appropriate than others, depending on context. Some are a matter of personal preference, while others are more legal in nature. As a general rule of thumb, the most appropriate terms are specific Native nation names, such as Lakota, Diné (aka Navajo), or Anishinaabe. But when referring to American Indians collectively, the older terms “American Indians,” “Indians,” and “tribes”  are  terms  used in federal  legal  parlance,  and tribal  nations  and individuals often still use these terms. “Native American” is more contemporary and also used in legal contexts, but many Native people prefer simply “Native” in addition to their specific tribal names. Native people often also prefer the term “nation” to “tribe,” since “tribe” can imply cultural inferiority, while “nation”

invokes   Indians’   historical,   preinvasion   self-determination   and   governing systems. The terms “Indigenous” and “fourth world” signal originality to place and also provide context for a more global category of people who share similar struggles against states. Accounting for these complexities, the terms are used interchangeably throughout the text. When discussing specific American states, except  where  naming   specific  states  (such  as  Washington  State),  “state” (lowercase s) is used to distinguish the individual state from “State” (capital S) meaning the US nation-state.




I N T R O D U C T I O N




The Standing Rock Saga


We are unapologetically Indigenous, we embody resistance, everything we do from eating rubber bullets for breakfast to holding our frontline has been done in a manner that is nothing but spiritual.

—RED WARRIOR CAMP COMMUNIQUE, DECEMBER 15, 20161

As things often do in Indian country, it began with a story, this one a prophecy. Ancestors of today’s Lakota, the people of Oceti Sakowin, had for generations warned  about  a  black  snake  that  would  slither  across  the  land,  bringing destruction to the  Earth and her  people.  The  day  representatives  for  Energy Transfer Partners entered the council chambers of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe on September 30, 2014, to present plans for the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL), it perhaps came as no surprise to the tribal council that another pipeline was threatening Lakota lands. Other Lakota bands, Plains tribes, and white ranchers and  farmers  were,  after  all,  already  fighting  the  Keystone  XL Pipeline.  But nobody that day could have predicted the debacle the DAPL would turn into— the extremes to which Energy Transfer Partners (ETP) would go to put down tribal opposition to the project, beginning with CEO Kelsey Warren’s lie that the tribe had not registered their dissent to the project early enough, and that if they had, the pipeline could have been rerouted. Or the human rights abuses by ETP’s private  security  firms  and  militarized  state  police  that  would  bring  United Nations observers to the protest camps. Or the level of support the tribe would receive for a cause millions of people around the world found to be righteous. Then again, maybe they could have.
The startling truth is that there are 2.4 million miles of black snakes in the United States. These pipelines convey more crude oil, gasoline, home heating oil, and natural gas than any  other country  in the world.2  Of the total miles, 72,000 are dedicated to crude. Pipelines are “an extremely safe way to transport energy  across the country,” says the oil industry’s Pipeline101.com, claiming they are generally considered safer than truck or rail transport. Yet hundreds of

pipeline leaks and ruptures occur each year, with consequences that range from relatively  benign  to  catastrophic.  And  with  the  pipeline  infrastructure  aging, critics warn about increasing risk of accidents.
Pipelines are so ubiquitous and normalized in the  American political (and actual)  landscape  that  they  aren’t  even  heavily  regulated.  While  numerous federal and state agencies oversee some aspects of the pipeline infrastructure, most  government  monitoring  and  enforcement  is  conducted  through  a  small agency   within  the   Department  of   Transportation  called  the   Pipeline   and Hazardous Materials Safety  Administration, PHMSA (“fimsa”) for short. The agency’s mandate requires that only 7 percent of natural gas lines and 44 percent of all hazardous liquid lines be subject to rigorous and regular inspection criteria. The rest are inspected less often.3
So when Energy  Transfer Partners initiated the permitting and construction process, it was business as usual. The pipeline—1,172 miles long and spanning four states—was designed to connect Bakken Oil Field crude to an oil field tank farm in Illinois, flowing 470,000 barrels per day. It’s hard to say if ETP was caught off guard when they encountered a dramatic groundswell of protest in 2016. Not that there hadn’t been indications of the possibility of a backlash; in 2015, farmers in Iowa registered their dissent against the project with letters to the Iowa Utilities Board. The following year a lawsuit was filed by thirty Iowans contesting  the  state’s  granting  eminent  domain  to  ETP.  At  the  same  time, opposition to the Keystone XL Pipeline had become so high profile, due to the cross-sectional organizing of many diverse groups, that President Barack Obama had rejected Keystone’s permit, sealing its fate in 2015. Pipeline protests were nothing new, given that the history of pipeline opposition goes back to at least 1968  with  the  building  of  the  Trans-Alaska  Pipeline  System,  and  the  battle against the Trans-Alaska Pipeline is still considered the biggest pipeline battle in history.4 What took ETP by surprise, however, was the Obama administration’s order to halt the DAPL project in December 2016 as the result of a massive grassroots resistance movement that mobilized millions of people in the United States and beyond.
The   resistance   movement,   organized   around   the   hashtags   #NoDAPL, #Mniwiconi, #Waterislife, and #Standwithstandingrock, officially began in April 2016 when a small group of women from the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe (SRST) set up camp and named it Camp of the Sacred Stones, or Sacred Stone Camp.5 The idea was to monitor pipeline construction while registering tribal dissent in a tangible way and, they hoped, to stop the project. SRST had known about the DAPL project since at least 2014 when Energy Transfer Partners conducted their

first meeting with the tribal council. As reported by the Bismarck Tribune, an audio recording from September 30 documents the first meeting between ETP and the tribal council in which the company outlines its planned route less than a mile from the reservation boundary  and crossing under the Missouri River at Lake  Oahe.  The  council  argued that  while  the  route  was  not  within current reservation boundaries, it was well within the boundaries acknowledged in the 1851 Treaty of Fort Laramie, and the treaty of 1868. The council expressed its concern  about  the  potential  of  desecrating  sacred  sites  and  the  danger  of contaminating the community’s water supply in the event of a pipeline rupture. The tribal council informed company representatives at the meeting that in 2012 they had passed a resolution opposing all pipelines within the treaty boundaries.6
Even more significant, ETP did not mention that an earlier proposal had the pipeline crossing  the Missouri River north of Bismarck  (some seventy  miles away), as documented by a map included with other documents provided to the North  Dakota  Public  Service  Commission  (PSC)  as  part  of  the  permitting process. The same document shows that a change to the route was made in September, the same month as the meeting with the tribal council. A permit for that route had been rejected by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) after an environmental assessment concluded that among other consequences, it posed too great a risk to wells that served Bismarck’s municipal water supply.7 This led to a charge of environmental racism by the Standing Rock tribal council, a claim the PSC dismissed. On July 27, 2016, SRST filed a lawsuit against the Army Corps, claiming multiple federal statutes were violated when it issued permits to ETP.8  And a  carefully  orchestrated campaign to discredit  the  Standing  Rock Sioux Tribe emerged, backed by fossil fuel interests in a state whose political machine is heavily influenced by industry money and where 90 percent of the population is white.
Meanwhile, back at Sacred Stone Camp, people kept coming. By late August there  were  thousands  of  people  at  what  was  being  referred  to  generally  as Standing Rock, and new camps were popping up. Sacred Stone, Oceti Sakowin, and Red Warrior were the three primary  camps people came to. Hundreds of tribal nations in the United States sent their support, financial and otherwise, and messages  of  encouragement  poured  in  from  Indigenous  and  non-Indigenous communities all over the world. Oceti Sakowin came to be the central gathering place for new arrivals, who were visually greeted by the dozens of tribal nation flags that regally lined the road of the main entrance. People brought donations of firewood, tents, construction materials, clothing, sleeping bags, and anything and everything needed for life in the camps. Kitchens staffed with volunteers fed

the masses with donated food. The demonstrators refused the term “protestors,” referring to themselves instead as “water protectors,” and their main organizing principle was peaceful prayer and ceremony. “Mni Wiconi” was their mantra, meaning “Water is life” in the Lakota language. Drugs, alcohol, and weapons were  banned  in  the  camps.  Although  violence  was  strictly  eschewed,  civil disobedience  was  embraced;  people  put  their  bodies  in  the  way   of  the construction path, locked themselves to heavy equipment, and got arrested.
As  remarkable  as  the  gathering  was,  few  outside  Indian  country  or  the environmental movement were initially aware of what was happening in North Dakota. The mainstream press had turned a blind eye—until the violence began. On September 3, 2016 (Labor Day), as people attempted to block the digging up of a sacred site, ETP brought in a private security firm armed with approximately eight attack dogs and mace. The security personnel sprayed people directly in the face and eyes and pushed the dogs to bite people. One dog was unleashed and ran into the crowd in attack mode.9  At least five people and a horse were bitten, and around thirty people were injured by the chemical spray. Images and video of the dog attacks went viral on social media, thanks to the handful of journalists  at  the  site,  particularly  Amy  Goodman  of  the  popular  program Democracy Now!, for whom an arrest warrant was later issued by the Morton County  Sheriff’s Department. Footage of a German shepherd with its mouth covered  in  blood  was  viewed  by   millions  of  people.  The  mayhem  and viciousness of attacks on American Indians was a chilling reminder of a history of brutality  used against the Lakota Sioux  by  the US military  in the staunch defense of their lands and freedom, and the dog attacks evoked the history of Christopher Columbus’s savage rampage and genocide against the Arawaks on Hispaniola in which dogs were used. After that day  the world started paying attention to the #NoDAPL movement at Standing Rock.
Instead  of  discouraging  people  from  coming  into  what  was  increasingly turning into a risky situation, the Labor Day incident attracted even more people to the encampment as Standing Rock began currying widespread favor in the media.  SRST  tribal  chairman  Dave  Archambault  Jr.  came  to  be  the  most recognizable face in what had grown into a global movement. Archambault (and other  Lakota  people  like  LaDonna  Brave  Bull  Allard and Dallas  Goldtooth) suddenly had a public platform to tell their stories, which described a long line of violent depredations against the seven nations of the Oceti Sakowin (literally “Seven   Council   Fires”),   the   Great   Sioux   Nation’s   traditional   name   for themselves.  These  accounts  include  centuries  of  genocidal  policies,  treaty violations, illegal land seizures, and environmental catastrophes perpetrated by the  US  settler  government.  The  creation  of  Lake  Oahe  itself  is  one  such

environmental catastrophe against the Standing Rock  people. Under the Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin Program, the Lake Oahe Dam was one of five dams built in Oceti Sakowin treaty territory. Completed in 1962, the lake created by the dam destroyed more Native land than any  other water project in the US, eliminating 90 percent of timberland on the Standing Rock and Cheyenne Sioux reservations and the loss of much grazing and agricultural land.10 Altogether, the nations lost 309,584 acres of vital bottomlands and more than one thousand Native  families  were  displaced  without  their  consent.  In  the  words  of  Kul Wicasa  Lakota  scholar  Nick  Estes,  “Entire  communities  were  removed  to marginal reservation lands, and many more were forced to leave the reservation entirely.”11
On one hand, the Dakota Access Pipeline was only the most recent intrusion into  the  Standing   Rock   Sioux’s  lands  and  sovereignty.  On  the  other,  it represented a breaking point, the final straw in which SRST sent the message that they would not tolerate the further desecration of their treaty lands and the potential contamination of their water—especially  for the sake of profits of a fossil  fuel  conglomerate  and  for  which  the  tribe  would  see  no  benefits whatsoever. Proponents of the DAPL argued that because the pipeline did not cross reservation boundaries, and because the  company  conducted a  meeting with the tribal council, the Army Corps’ permit was in compliance with the law. But  SRST  contended that  the  territory  within the  original  treaty  boundaries, which  covers  a  far  larger  area  than  the  current  reservation  boundaries,  was legally subject to a more extensive environmental study than had been done.12 The council also argued that the tribe should have been consulted much earlier and more thoroughly, especially given the presence of traditional burial grounds and Lake Oahe as the primary source of drinking water for the reservation.13
SRST  consistently  maintained  that  all  they  wanted  was  for  an  EIS,  an environmental impact statement, to be performed and the pipeline rerouted away from   the   lake.   Their   legal   team,   the   iconoclastic   nonprofit   Earthjustice, continually filed motions designed to halt construction, force the EIS, and push the Army Corps to deny the easement for the lake crossing. The court and even other departments of the federal government responded with a joint request for ETP to voluntarily halt construction, which the company declined to heed.14 On September 16 a federal district court in Washington, DC, ordered the company to temporarily  cease construction, but the company  ignored the order and work continued.15  On October  10  another  joint  statement  was  issued by  the  three federal  departments—the  Army  Corps,  the  Department  of  Justice,  and  the Department of the Interior—repeating requests for a voluntary stoppage.16 Still,

the work continued. While the tribal council wrangled with lawyers, courts, and federal agencies, water protectors on the ground continued to put their bodies in the  way  of  construction,  and  tensions  mounted.  Observers  pointed  out  that instead of following  their mandate to protect the public, the Morton County Sheriff’s   Department,   becoming   increasingly   militarized,   was   in   reality protecting Energy Transfer Partners pipeline project. And then the standoff at Standing Rock took a shocking turn for the worse.
Construction crews,  whose  drill  pad was  on a  bluff  adjacent  to the  Oceti Sakowin encampment, had drawn closer to the Lake Oahe crossing. A group of water protectors had set up a new camp—with tipis, tents, a small kitchen, and a sweat lodge—directly in the crew’s path and blockaded the main road in and out of the area. They  named it the 1851 Treaty  Camp, in commemoration of the original Fort Laramie treaty. Media reports said the camp was on private land that the Dakota Access Pipeline had recently  purchased, but water protectors asserted it was unceded treaty land, land that had been wrongfully taken to begin with.17  A statement issued on October 24 by Mekasi Camp-Horinek, an Oceti Sakowin  camp  coordinator,  read,  “Today,  the  Oceti  Sakowin  has  enacted eminent domain on DAPL lands, claiming 1851 treaty rights. This is unceded land. Highway 1806 as of this point is blockaded. We will be occupying this land and staying here until this pipeline is permanently stopped. We need bodies and we need people who are trained in nonviolent direct action. We are still staying nonviolent and we are still staying peaceful.”18 Three days later, on October 27, the militarized police conducted a violent sweep of the camp, with more than three hundred officers from five states in riot gear and aided by eight all-terrain vehicles, five armored vehicles, two helicopters, and numerous military grade Humvees.19 Several live Facebook feeds captured police using high-tech sound weapons (known as Long Range Acoustic Device, or LRAD), tasers, beanbag guns,   pepper   spray,   concussion   grenades,   and   batons;   and   snipers   were reportedly seen on the armored vehicles.20 One horse was shot and later had to be put down. Police alleged that water protectors set fires to several vehicles and a bulldozer, that a Molotov cocktail was thrown at them, and that a woman fired three shots at police; claims that were unsubstantiated by any of the videos. The violence lasted several hours, and at the end of the day 141 people had been arrested and many people were injured, some severely.
Ironically, the same day Ammon and Ryan Bundy were acquitted of charges in the  armed  takeover  of  the  Malheur  Wildlife  Refuge  (formerly  the  Malheur Indian Reservation) in January 2016. Commentators noted the disproportionate use of police violence against the Standing Rock water protectors, compared to

the way the Malheur situation was handled.21 Indian people recalled the chilling parallel  of  militarized  violence  in  1973  during  the  seventy-one-day  siege  at Wounded Knee in South Dakota.
The numerous videos captured on October 27 went viral, further galvanizing the  world’s  attention  and  support  for  Standing  Rock’s  cause.  The  violence, however,  didn’t  end  there.  On  the  evening  of  November  20,  police  again attacked peaceful water protectors with rubber bullets, tear gas, and mace after they  attempted to remove a police blockade on Highway  1806. The violence became potentially lethal when police sprayed the crowd with a water cannon in the subfreezing temperatures. One young woman, Sophia Wilansky, was hit with an explosive  device  that  nearly  blew  her  arm  off.  Legal  observers  with  the National  Lawyers  Guild  said  that  numerous  people  lost  consciousness  after being   shot.   More   than   one   hundred   people   were   hurt   and   many   were hospitalized, and there were speculations that the water cannon was mixed with mace.  An  elderly  woman  went  into  cardiac  arrest  and  was  revived  on  the scene.22
Throughout the months of the Standing Rock standoff, President Obama had remained  mostly  silent,  aside  from  one  interview  with  NowThis  News  on November 1, where he said, “We are monitoring this closely. I think as a general rule, my  view is that there is a way  for us to accommodate sacred lands of Native Americans. I think that right now the Army Corps is examining whether there are ways to reroute this pipeline.”23 Meanwhile, an extremely contentious presidential election was just a few days away, with polls favoring the Democrat, Hillary  Clinton. Clinton had also been silent on the Standing  Rock  issue but finally issued a statement on October 27, the same day as the 1851 Treaty Camp incident and the Bundy decision. The only reason she said anything at all was because a contingent of Native youth stormed her campaign office in Brooklyn, New York, demanding some kind of acknowledgment. The statement was not what the #NoDAPL activists had hoped for. In a scant four sentences, Clinton said that “all voices should be heard” and that all parties involved needed to “find a path forward that serves the broadest public interest.”24  Indian country viewed Clinton’s position as no less than a tacit endorsement for the DAPL project, or in the words of one commentator, “a crock.”25 As for the Republican candidate, Donald Trump, while he made no official statement, it was widely presumed what a Trump presidency—as outlandish as it seemed at the time— would mean for the DAPL: green lights all the way. It had been well publicized that Trump was an investor in Energy Transfer Partners, and that ETP had also donated a lot of money to the Trump campaign. It was, however, a matter of

speculation about how a Clinton presidency would handle the DAPL. But then on Tuesday, November 9, the unthinkable happened, and Trump was elected president.
A few  days  after  the  election,  with  more  than  half  the  country  in  shock (especially  Indian  country  and  their  allies  in  the  environmental  movement), Energy Transfer Partners CEO Kelsey Warren appeared on CBS News, breaking his own silence on the pipeline controversy. Noting that the pipeline was already 84 percent complete, Kelsey expressed that he was “100 percent confident” that the Trump administration would grant the contested easement and get the project completed. It was a bitter pill, yet no reasonable person could argue against it being probably true.26
But on December 4 the DAPL roller coaster took another surprising turn—the one that caught ETP off guard—when the Army Corps announced it would not grant the permit for the lake crossing. It clearly seemed to be a major victory for Standing  Rock.  The  corps  said  that  after  discussions  with  the  tribe  and  the company, more work  was necessary, and that “the best way  to complete that work responsibly and expeditiously is to explore alternate routes for the pipeline crossing.”  This  could  best  be  accomplished,  the  Army  Corps  said,  through engaging full public input and analysis and an environmental impact statement “that  could  aid  in  future  showdowns  with  President-elect  Donald  Trump’s incoming administration.”27
The #NoDAPL movement could bask  for a moment in the glow from that victory.  It  was  fragile,  however,  with  the  looming  threat  of  what  a  Trump administration would bring, and everyone, especially water protectors, knew it wouldn’t be good. Reality set in when Trump took office and within days started signing executive orders. One executive order after another, sometimes several a day, came for the first several weeks of his presidency, signaling his intention to make good on some of his more controversial campaign promises, like banning and   deporting   undocumented   immigrants,   building   a   border   wall,   and overturning the Affordable Care Act, among many others. Reviving the Dakota Access Pipeline was at the top of his list when on January 24, 2017, his second day  in  the  White  House,  he  signed  a  presidential  memorandum  “regarding construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline” and authorized both the Dakota Access Pipeline and the Keystone XL Pipeline.28 The memorandum itself had no legal teeth to overturn the Army Corps’ decision to order an EIS but did make clear  the  administration’s  pro-fossil-fuel  agenda  and  intention  to  move  the project forward. Two weeks later the environmental review had been canceled and the easement was granted by the Army Corps.

Attempts  to  evict  the  water  protectors  from  the  #NoDAPL  encampments began  in  November.  The  evictions  were  supported  by  the  Morton  County Sheriff’s Department, the Army Corps of Engineers, the Standing Rock tribal council, and, eventually, the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Deadlines were set and changed. Given that the winter had brought abundant snow and that the camps were in a known floodplain, officials were concerned about the impact of the snowmelt. Newly elected governor Doug Burgum ordered a final date, February 22. Under the supervision of hundreds of armed police, one hundred fifty or so of the people who remained at Oceti Sakowin ceremoniously  marched out of camp,  while  fires  burned  wooden  structures  in  the  background  and  people drummed and sang prayer songs. A stalwart group of forty-six unarmed water protectors held their ground and the following day were arrested at gunpoint. The same day  at a White House press conference, in response to a question about  why  the  president  hadn’t  yet  intervened to try  to negotiate  a  solution between  Standing  Rock  and  Energy  Transfer  Partners  as  promised,  press secretary  Sean Spicer stated that the president had “been in contact with all parties involved, . . . working and communicating back and forth.”29  Chairman Archambault responded that the claim was “absolutely false”; there had been no contact despite repeated requests for meetings with the Trump administration— just one in a myriad of “alternative facts” the new administration immediately became known for.

Although on the surface it appeared that the #NoDAPL movement was defeated in the wake of a hostile Trump administration, water protectors, Standing Rock Sioux  Tribe,  and  Indian  country  more  broadly  claimed  the  nearly  yearlong protest movement as a victory on many fronts. For one thing, it was the ground for a ceremonial reunification of the Seven Council Fires—including a revival of the term “Oceti Sakowin”—in a way that hadn’t occurred since the Battle of the Little Big Horn. And it brought more than three hundred tribal nations together in solidarity for Standing Rock’s cause and for environmental justice throughout Indian country. Beyond that, it was widely acknowledged by scholars and other commentators as the most significant Indigenous protest in recent US history. As part of the climate justice movement, it arose spontaneously and on the heels of the Idle No More movement and the less successful Occupy movement a few years earlier. By  comparison, the  last Native resistance  movements of  major consequence occurred in the 1960s and early ’70s, beginning with the Fish Wars in  the  Pacific  Northwest  (approximately  1964–74)  and  the  Alcatraz  Island occupation of 1969–71. Then, the Trail of Broken Treaties and takeover of the Bureau of Indian Affairs building in 1972 and the seventy-one-day armed siege

of Wounded Knee in 1973, while viewed as militant and violent, nonetheless contributed to a growing national consciousness about the United States’ pattern of injustice toward American Indians. Collectively those actions led to sweeping changes in federal Indian policy, which included the Boldt Decision of 1974 (reaffirming  tribal  treaty  rights)  and  Public  Law  93-638,  the  Indian  Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975. These and many  more progressive  legislative   acts   and  court   decisions   constituted  a   reversal   of previously oppressive federal policy and accorded new respect for government to  government  relationships  between  the  United  States  and  tribal  nations, however imperfectly implemented.
Those previous victories happened amid a social revolution that resulted in new levels of enfranchisement for a number of historically marginalized people. Half a century later, the gains made during the civil rights era (approximately 1954–68)  became  threatened as  a  result  of  a  growing  conservative  backlash during  the  Reagan  years—and  intensified  despite  eight  years  of  an  African American   presidency—reaching	startling	proportions   during	the   Trump campaign. Two decades of neoliberal policies under Democratic and Republican leadership led to the worst economic recession since the Great Depression. The subprime mortgage debacle and bank bailouts, ever-widening gaps in wealth and income, loss of the American manufacturing  base and rampant offshoring  of previously American-held jobs, and a health-care crisis became fertile ground for a blame game that pitted economically struggling people against each other. Renewed	racial	tensions	evidenced	in    particular	by	disproportionate incarceration  of  people  of  color  and  rampant  police  brutality  led  to  new movements like Black  Lives Matter, while right-wing  operatives like Donald Trump,  the  so-called  alt-right,  and  a  Republican-controlled  Congress,  were widely	perceived   as	stoking    the	flames	of	xenophobia    and   racism. “Trumplicans” (Trump Republicans) seized power by promising extreme market fundamentalism reliant on fossil fuels, an authoritarianism that would have made Richard Nixon proud, and a toxic rejection of what they referred to as “political correctness,”  which  was  really  just  a  dog-whistle  invoking  their  hatred  of Democratic values. Shored up by a disdain for the media and a loose relationship with the truth, the Trump administration was on a collision course with Standing Rock and served as little more than a thinly disguised sponsor for the Energy Transfer Partners’Dakota Access Pipeline.
It is no surprise that the #NoDAPL movement would spring  up in Indian country. In the big picture, after all, it was just one more assault on the lands, resources,  and  self-determination  of  Native  peoples  since  the  beginning  of American settler colonialism. As the Standing Rock story illustrates, the assaults

have never ended. It also illustrates the trend in the past couple of decades of the uniting of the environmental movement with Indigenous peoples’ movements all over the world, something that hasn’t always been the case. Environmentalists recognize that the assaults on the environment committed by relentless corporate “extractivism” and development are assaults on the possibility  for humans to sustain  themselves  in  the  future.  They  recognize  that  in  some  ways,  what happened to the Indians is now happening to everybody not in the 1 percent.
This  book  is  not  about  Standing  Rock—but  it  takes  Standing  Rock  as  an excellent example of what environmental injustice in Indian country looks like. It starts from the assumption that colonization was not just a process of invasion and eventual domination of Indigenous populations by European settlers but also that  the  eliminatory  impulse  and  structure  it  created  in  actuality  began  as environmental  injustice.  Seen  in  this  light,  settler  colonialism  itself  is  for Indigenous  peoples  a  structure  of  environmental  injustice.  As  this  book  will argue, however, the underlying assumptions of environmental injustice as it is commonly understood and deployed are grounded in racial and economic terms and  defined  by  norms  of  distributive  justice  within  a  capitalist  framework. Indigenous peoples’ pursuit of environmental justice (EJ) requires the use of a different lens, one with a scope that can accommodate the full weight of the history of settler colonialism, on one hand, and embrace differences in the ways Indigenous peoples view land and nature, on the other. This includes an ability to acknowledge  sacred  sites  as  an  issue  of  environmental  justice—not  merely religious freedom—and recognize and protect sites outside the boundaries of reservation  lands  or  on  aboriginal  lands  of  nonfederally  recognized  tribes. Overall, a differentiated environmental justice framework—we could call this an “Indigenized” EJ—must acknowledge the political existence of Native nations and be capable of explicitly respecting principles of Indigenous nationhood and self-determination.
These principles of nationhood and self-determination are plainly evident in the ways Native peoples have always fought to defend and remain on their lands and the life those lands give them. From the intrusions of the earliest colonists into Native gardens, to the havoc wreaked by railroads and the imposition of reservation boundaries, to today’s pipeline and fracking  conflicts, Indigenous peoples  have  been  forced  into  never-ending  battles  of  resistance.  As  the #NoDAPL movement  made  clear  through the  slogan “Water  is  life,”  Native resistance is inextricably bound to worldviews that center not only the obvious life-sustaining  forces  of  the  natural  world  but  also  the  respect  accorded  the natural world in relationships of reciprocity based on responsibility toward those life forms.30  The implicit question this book asks is what does environmental

justice look like when Indigenous peoples are at the center?
To that  end,  this  book  proceeds  in eight  chapters  that  identify  Indigenous approaches to conceiving of environmental justice. Having laid the foundation with the Standing Rock story, it views environmental justice and injustice from a variety of angles, taking a view on the history of American Indians’ relationship with the US as an environmental history. It uncompromisingly exposes the roots of  white  supremacy  not  only  at  the  governmental  level  but  even within the environmental movement itself, ultimately for the purpose of building effective alliances around issues of common concern. It recounts numerous examples of how  Native  and  non-Native  peoples  are  working  together  to  build  those partnerships, and the importance of women to these efforts, and takes you on a journey to Southern California to tell a story about how one coastal sacred site and  iconic  surf  break  were  simultaneously  saved  as  a  result  of  successful coalition building and recognition of the sacred site’s importance. Finally, the book  looks for a way  forward for environmental justice in Indian country  by identifying   positive  trends  and  innovative  ways  communities  are  rallying together to build a more sane future in the face of relentless corporate power, an entrenched fossil fuel industry, and its collusion with the US State.
The most I hope to accomplish is to scratch the surface of what environmental justice means in Indian country, in terms of academic theory, activist praxis, and where the two meet in the formulation of government policies at all levels. It is a daunting (and humbling) task in which this is but one possible starting point; it is undoubtedly  incomplete  and  imperfect,  but  one  that  I  hope  scholars  more accomplished than I will expand and build upon in time.




C H A P T E R    O N E




Environmental Justice Theory and Its Limitations for Indigenous Peoples


You are now in a country where you can be happy; no white man shall ever again disturb you; the Arkansas [River] will protect your southern boundary when you get there. You will be protected on either side; the white shall never again encroach upon you, and you will have a great outlet to the West.
As long as water flows, or grass grows upon the earth, or the sun rises to show your pathway, or you kindle your camp fires, so long shall you be protected from your present habitations.

—PRESIDENT JAMES MONROE’S SPEECH TO THE CHEROKEES, 1817


HISTORY. ORIGINS. AND DEFINITION OF ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTIC E
“Environmental justice” did not enter common vernacular until the early 1980s. In 1982, when a landfill designed to accept PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls, a highly toxic by-product of the chemical industry) was proposed to be placed in Warren   County,	North   Carolina—a	predominantly	low-income	African American community—it sparked a massive protest to try to stop the project. The protest failed to stop the dumping, but it stands nonetheless as a defining moment in the environmental movement and is generally hailed as the birth of the environmental justice movement. It was not the first incident of minority communities resisting exposure to hazardous environmental conditions. In the early  1960s,  for  example,  Cesar  Chavez  organized  Latino  farmworkers  to improve their working conditions, including protection from toxic insecticides. In 1968  black  residents  in West  Harlem,  New  York,  waged an unsuccessful campaign  against  siting  a  sewage  plant  in  their  community.  Many   more examples can be named, but it was the Warren County protests that galvanized national attention, leading to claims that the proliferation of toxic facilities in communities  of  color  was  environmental  racism.  Citizen  groups  from  poor

minority communities began forming beyond North Carolina; they believed they were   being   targeted   by   polluting   industries,   resulting   in   high   rates   of environmentally related illnesses.1
The  Warren  County  incident  led  initially  to  several  foundational  studies designed to uncover the veracity of the claims being made by communities. In the first of the studies, commissioned by Congress, thanks to the influence of Democratic   representative   Walter   Fauntroy,   delegate   to   the   House   of Representatives from the District of Columbia, the US General Accountability Office confirmed that blacks made up the majority of the population in three of the four communities in a region where four off-site hazardous waste landfills were  located  (EPA  Region  Four,  consisting  of  Alabama,  Florida,  Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North and South Carolina, and Tennessee).2
In  1986  two  cross-sectional  studies  were  conducted  to  determine  to  what extent  African  Americans,  Hispanic  Americans,  Asian  Americans,  Pacific Islanders, and Native Americans were exposed to uncontrolled toxic waste sites and  commercial  hazardous  waste  facilities  in  their  communities.  Those  two studies—the  first  national  studies  of  their  kind—were  brought  together  in another study in 1987, Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States: A National Report on the Racial and Socio-Economic Characteristics of Communities with Hazardous Waste Sites, which originated from the United Church of Christ’s Commission for Racial Justice (CRJ), led by Ben Chavis. The findings revealed, among   other   things,   the   smoking   gun:   while   socioeconomic   status   was implicated in siting  hazardous  waste  facilities,  race  was  the  most  significant variable,   and   three   of   every   five   black   and   Hispanic   Americans   and approximately half of all Asians, Pacific Islanders, and American Indians lived in communities with uncontrolled toxic waste sites.3  Among the report’s many recommendations,  it  urged  the  US  president  to  issue  an  executive  order mandating  federal  agencies  to  “consider  the  impact  of  current  policies  and regulations  on  racial  and  ethnic  communities”  and  for  the  Environmental Protection Agency  to establish an Office of Hazardous Waste and Racial and Ethnic Affairs.
It  made  sense  that  these  early  studies  would  emerge  from  the  African American community, given their leadership in the civil rights movement. It was a  good  and  necessary  start  to  articulating  this  new  environmental  justice movement, as the studies addressed long-standing, life-threatening problems in communities plagued by centuries of exploitation and marginalization. And they laid a solid foundation for other marginalized communities to build upon. What was true about the early research, however, was that as the Toxic Wastes and

Race  study  exemplified,  their  predominant  focus  on  the  effects  of  siting  of noxious  facilities  provided  only  a  narrow  window  into  how  environmental racism played out in communities of color. But racial and ethnic minorities were being   environmentally—and   economically—exploited   in   ways   that   didn’t involve incinerators or dumps. Between 1965 and 1971, for example, under the leadership  of  Cesar  Chavez,  Mexican  farmworkers  in  California  launched  a historic  resistance  movement  to organize  a  union not  only  in the  interest  of raising wages and improving working conditions but also to combat pesticide abuse, which was notorious for making workers sick. As leading environmental justice scholar Laura Pulido shows, the farmworkers’ struggle brought together multiple  issues  that  tied  economic  and  political  exploitation  together  with environmental   abuse   to   show   how   hegemonic   relationships   disempower marginalized communities in many seemingly disparate but inevitably connected ways. As she writes, by fully appreciating the conditions structuring the lives of minorities  and their  precarious  economic  circumstances,  it  becomes  apparent how new social movements and the environmental concerns of people of color differ   dramatically,   resulting   in   the   need   for   a   new   understanding   of environmentalism.4
The  narrow  focus  of  the  early  EJ  research  on  the  location  of  toxic  and hazardous waste sites was only the beginning point for EJ research, and as it evolved, so would the nuances of the research. Important distinctions were yet to be  made,  such  as  how  experiences  varied  across  racial  and  ethnic  minority groups  (as  the  California  farmworkers  case  demonstrates).  It  would  become apparent that collapsing  environmental discrimination against people of color into one monolithic group elided the experience of Indigenous peoples who had been undergoing environmental devastation of a particular, genocidal kind. For one thing, as the Toxic Wastes and Race study makes visible, it couldn’t account for the ways Native Americans were being poisoned by uranium mine tailings in the hundreds of abandoned mines on and near reservations, the contaminated water the mines created, and how many had died as a result of uranium mining during  the  Manhattan Project  era.  Nor  could collapsing  all  racial  and ethnic minority   groups’  EJ   experiences   into   one   account   for   the   ways   forced displacement and assimilation over hundreds of years had disrupted traditional food systems  to such an extent  that  chronic  health problems  and lower  life expectancies in Native American and Native Hawaiian communities would be attributed to it. Or the ways foreign invasion and military occupation in Hawaii had rendered large  swaths  of  land—including  an entire  island—not  only  off limits to Native Hawaiians but totally uninhabitable for generations to come.
Although the early studies initiated the important work of underscoring the

ways in which environmental issues overlap with racial issues, the early studies also made visible wounds that had been festering for decades in communities of color and identified environmental justice as a civil rights issue. It wasn’t until 1991, when the Commission for Racial Justice sponsored a landmark gathering, the first People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit in Washington, DC, that the first inklings of indigenized environmental justice could be seen. The summit  produced  a  visionary  document  titled  Principles  of  Environmental Justice. Its preamble reads:

We, the people of color, gathered together at this multinational People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit, to begin to build a national and international movement of all peoples of color to fight the destruction and taking of our lands and communities, do hereby re-establish our spiritual interdependence to the sacredness of Mother Earth; to respect and celebrate each of our cultures, languages and beliefs about the natural world and our roles  in  healing  ourselves;  to  ensure  environmental  justice;  to  promote economic  alternatives  which  would  contribute  to  the  development  of environmentally safe livelihoods; and to secure our political, economic and cultural liberation that has been denied for over 500 years of colonization and oppression, resulting in the poisoning of our communities and land and the  genocide  of  our  peoples,  do  affirm  and  adopt  these  Principles  of Environmental Justice.5

As  the  language  suggests,  the  seventeen-point  proclamation  represented  a greater level of inclusion for Indigenous concerns than the preceding studies had, framing  environmental  justice  in  terms  of  colonial  histories  and  oppressive political domination, even reflecting an Indigenous worldview by  recognizing “our spiritual interdependence to the sacredness of Mother Earth.” Specific to Indigenous  peoples,  principle  eleven claims  that  “environmental  justice  must recognize a special legal and natural relationship of Native Peoples to the U.S. government  through  treaties,  agreements,  compacts,  and  covenants  affirming sovereignty   and  self-determination,”  and  principle   fifteen,   “Environmental justice opposes military occupation, repression and exploitation of lands, peoples and cultures, and other life forms.” It was a big step forward in recognizing the distinctions between Indigenous populations and all others, necessary in framing legal  approaches  to  environmental  justice—a  goal  that  has  yet  to  be  fully realized.

THE LEGAL LANDSC APE OF EJ
The  concept  of  environmental  justice  began finding  its  way  into the  federal regulatory  terrain with the help of the Congressional Black  Caucus. Since its inception  in  1971  the  CBC  had  been  advocating  for  strong  environmental policies, including the Clean Water Act (1972); the Marine Protection, Research, and  Sanctuaries  Act  (1972);  the  Endangered  Species  Act  (1973);  the  Safe Drinking  Water  Act  (1974);  the  Toxic  Substances  Control  Act  (1976);  the Comprehensive  Environmental  Response,  Compensation,  and  Liability   Act (1980); and the Nuclear Waste Policy Act (1982).6 With the CBC’s leadership, in 1990 the EPA established the Environmental Equity  Work  Group (EEWG) in response to findings by social scientists that “‘racial minority and low-income populations bear a higher environmental risk burden than the general population’ and   that   the   EPA’s   inspections   failed   to   adequately   protect   low-income communities   of   color.”7	Based   on   this   knowledge,   the   EPA   defines environmental justice as “the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income, with respect to the development,   implementation,   and   enforcement   of   environmental   laws, regulations, and policies.”8 The EEWG was tasked with two primary functions: first, to evaluate evidence that racial minority  and low-income groups bear a disproportionate burden of environmental risks, and second, to identify factors that contribute to different risk burdens and suggest strategies for improvement.9
In  1992,  one  year  after  the  People  of  Color  Environmental  Leadership Summit, the EPA formed the Office of Environmental Equity, and in 1993 it created  the  National  Environmental  Justice  Advisory  Council  (NEJAC).  By 1994 the office’s name was changed to the Office of Environmental Justice. That same   year   President   Bill   Clinton   issued   Federal   Actions   to   Address Environmental  Justice  in Minority  Populations  and Low-Income  Populations, Executive Order 12898. The executive order created the Interagency Working Group on Environmental Justice, which was charged with conducting research, data   collection,   and   analysis.   To   date,   the   executive   order   remains   the cornerstone of environmental justice regulation in the US, with the EPA as its central arbiter. The EPA’s primary EJ functions lie in standard setting, permitting of  facilities,  grant  making,  issuing  licenses  and  regulations,  and  reviewing proposed actions of other federal agencies.10
Executive Order 12898 mandates federal agencies to ensure that recipients of federal  funds  comply  with  Title  VI  of  the  Civil  Rights  Act  of  1964  “by conducting their programs in a non-discriminatory manner [based on race, color, or  national  origin].  Unlike  Title  VI,  Executive  Order  12898  does  not  create

legally enforceable rights or obligations.”11  Some critics argue that Title VI is ineffective at addressing environmental injustice, in part because it is unlikely that  section  602  (the  clause  prohibiting  discrimination  in  federally  funded projects) is privately enforceable.12
Legislative efforts to pass an EJ bill have been vexed for decades. The first attempt to pass an EJ bill—the Environmental Justice Act of 1992 (H.R. 2105)— died in committee in both the House and the Senate. Then, with a Republican takeover in 1994, Congress hamstrung further efforts to pass this progressive legislation. Subsequent attempts to pass environmental justice legislation went awry in 2007 and again in 2011 with a proposal by Representative Jesse Jackson Jr. (D-IL) to amend the Constitution, recognizing the “right to a clean, safe, and sustainable environment.” Another congressional blow to EJ was delivered in 2009   when   the   Congressional   Research   Service   stopped   using   the   term “environmental justice” as a tool for citizens to track EJ-related legislation.13
In the court system, scholars generally recognize the limited results of EJ law. Legal scholars Clifford Rechtschaffen, Eileen Gauna, and Catherine O’Neill said in 2009 that legal challenges have met with “mixed success,” where “claims alleging violations of the Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution have largely  failed because  of  the  difficulty  of  proving  intentional  discrimination. Other claims, some using traditional common law theories and environmental laws, have been somewhat more successful.”14 The authors contend that, overall, integrating EJ into environmental regulations in a meaningful way has proven to be  extremely  complex.  More  recently,  another  study  found  that  courts  have provided  too  few  opportunities  for  environmental  justice  advocates  to  effect change when limited to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the US Constitution, and the National Environmental Policy Act.15


EJ FRAMEWORKS IN THE C APITALIST STATE
Changing  the  name  of  the  Office  of  Environmental  Equity  to  the  Office  of Environmental Justice in 1994 came on the heels of public criticism and reflects what remains a long-standing debate in activist, academic, and legal EJ circles.16 As many  have pointed out, the difference between environmental equity  and environmental justice is in how risk is distributed. Equity says that the burden of environmental risk should be equally distributed among all populations, whereas justice  guarantees  protection  from  environmental  degradation,  prevention  of adverse health impacts, mechanisms for accountability, and the availability of

remedial action and resources. Justice guarantees three basic rights: the right to information, the right to a hearing, and the right to compensation;17  or as EJ activist Mike Ewall succinctly states, “It represents the fundamental difference between the concepts of ‘poison people equally’ and ‘stop poisoning  people, period!’”18
While proving environmental racism is easier said than done when it comes to law, scholars also argue that simply defining terms like environmental justice, environmental  racism,  and  even  environment  and  environmentalism  can  be difficult and contentious. For instance, environmental racism is a narrow term that doesn’t account for ways in which poor white communities are affected by polluting industries, or the ways it can ignore the historic and systemic nature of racism. From this perspective, the question is, is race or class responsible for discriminatory  pollution?  Similarly,  how  we  understand  environment  raises questions about human presence in and use of the environment. In whatever ways  we  answer  these  questions,  they  are  rooted  in  certain  fundamental assumptions: first, they are based on a paradigm of social justice that presumes the authority of the State (nation-state), under which victims of social injustice are presumably subjected with their consent, even if as ethnic minorities they are “others.”  Scholars  often call  the  ethnically  diverse  State  the  multicultural  or multiethnic State. Second, the multicultural State is a form of democracy where justice is framed by principles embedded in a capitalist system. This leads to a third point: that justice is presumed to follow a distributive model. Let’s briefly analyze each of these three points.
The multicultural nature of the State is capable of recognizing that ethnic and cultural groups have varied histories and interests, and sometimes those interests clash with each other. This is exemplified in the Southwest where hundreds of years of colonial interactions between Indigenous peoples, Hispano populations (Spanish descendants who were under Spanish and later Mexican rule prior to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo), and more recent white settlers have led to complicated and ongoing environmental battles based on conflicts over Spanish land grants and American treaties and laws and varied ideas about proper land use.   For   example,   in   northern   New   Mexico   in   the   1980s   and   ’90s, environmentalists (predominantly  white) came into conflict with the Hispano community of Ganados del Valle over the community’s controlled use of elk-grazing habitat.19 In another northern New Mexico example, battles over forest use demonstrated widely divergent beliefs among white environmentalists, state forest  service  officials,  Chicano,  Hispanic,  and  Latino  activists,  Indigenous peoples,  and  even  nuclear  scientists  as  a  result  of  the  Los  Alamos  Nuclear

Laboratory.20
Bringing us to the second point, the logical question is how would an accurate EJ analysis account for these particularities, or differences, and can they coexist under the universalizing impulse of the State? Racism at its most basic level is the denial of the benefits of national citizenship (particularly  equality), either covertly  or overtly. In theory, equality  in a democracy  means that all people, regardless of ethnicity  or race, have equal opportunity  to enjoy  the potential advantages  available  to them:  a  comfortable  life  with financial  security,  fair wages, a clean environment, education, and so on. These represent, in a capitalist democracy, the promise of material benefits for all.21
Third, if justice is a function of the capitalist State (which is imbued with the power to correct wrongs), when redress is sought for environmental injustices committed  against  ethnic  minority  groups,  it  is  typically  conceived  of  as distributive justice. That is, both the risks of environmental degradation and the benefits of a clean environment would be evenly  distributed among  citizens. However,  some  scholars  contend  that  a  distributive  framework  of  justice  is insufficient, because on a global scale, it doesn’t account for the “social, cultural, symbolic, and institutional conditions underlying poor distribution in the first place.”22   This  would  also  be  true  in  the  domestic  sphere.  In  this  line  of reasoning,  a  focus  on  the  distribution  of  goods  and  “bads”  ignores  group difference, perpetuating a lack of recognition and participation (for example, the right   and  institutional   ability   of   activists   and  communities   to  speak   for themselves). This relates  directly  to Indigenous peoples. One  example is  the United States’ refusal to abide by the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) in the Dakota Access Pipeline controversy, and its guarantee of the right of free, prior, and informed consent in projects that involve industrial development in traditional Indigenous lands.23  Had the US Army Corps of Engineers taken seriously the United States’ commitment to the UN declaration, in which the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe would have been given the opportunity to exercise their institutional ability to speak for themselves, one can imagine a different outcome to the Dakota Access Pipeline controversy.


THE POLITIC AL DIFFERENC E OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Emphasizing the ways that a solely distributive notion of environmental justice fails   Indigenous   peoples,   EJ   scholar   David   Schlosberg   notes   different conceptions  of  justice  in  the  EJ  movement,  and  that  too  often  Indigenous conceptions of justice—and Indigenous ways of understanding land and human

relations   with   it—are   obstructed   or   not   recognized   at   all.   Even   more problematic, as he points out, Indigenous nations in North America experience numerous  barriers  to  their  participation  in  the  governance  of  environments. Broadening participation, he contends, would enhance recognition and validate diverse ways of valuing land.24
For a conception of environmental justice to be relevant to a group of people, it must fit within conceptual boundaries that are meaningful to them. Indigenous peoples  fighting  for  political  autonomy  from  the  hegemony  of  the  State  are fighting the forces of colonialism while simultaneously fighting capitalism—all aimed at control of land and resources—with colonialism as the precondition for capitalism.  The  wealth generated in the  Americas  (much of  it  transferred to Europe)   could   only	accumulate   from   centuries   of   violent   Indigenous displacement, genocide, and land theft. Colonialism is inextricably  bound up with slavery, having paved the way for the transatlantic slave trade initiated by Columbus in his first voyage to the “New World.” Colonialism and slavery are also irrefutably linked to the unprecedented amassing of wealth in the United States.  Karl  Marx  recognized  colonialism  as  the  genesis  of  what  he  called “primitive accumulation,” connecting colonialism, slavery, and capitalism. He wrote,   “The   discovery   of   gold   and   silver   in   America,   the   extirpation, enslavement  and  entombment  in  mines  of  the  aboriginal  population,  the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting  of black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist production. These idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of primitive accumulation.”25 In the foundation of the US, slavery and capitalism are the two cornerstones made possible by colonial dispossession of Indigenous lands.
In settler colonialism, which is viewed not just as a historical event but also a structure designed to eliminate the Native via physical and political erasure, the purpose of political control and domination is to gain access to territory.26  The political  erasure  of  Indigenous  peoples  happens  in  many   different  ways, including the refusal of the State to fully  recognize the nationhood of Native collective existence. In the US legal system, Native nationhood is expressed as federal recognition and the so-called government to government relationship.27 In other words, the State has become the sole determiner of Native nationhood, despite the longevity of a people and a community that have been tied to a place since time immemorial and their collective ongoing Indigenous identity. Native peoples are thus in the position of fighting against the whims of the State not only to protect their lands but also for their continued existence as nations.

Central to Native nationhood is sovereignty. Federal law has long recognized the inherent sovereignty of Native nations based on treaty relationships, but it is a limited form dictated by legal doctrines as imagined by the US Supreme Court. The first three cases ever argued in front of the court involving Indians, referred to as the Marshall Trilogy, form the basis of today’s canon of federal Indian law. The  court  created  what  legal  scholars  have  widely  called  legal  fictions  that constructed Native peoples’ relationships with the State that reached beyond the original intent of the treaties (the recognition of the independent existence of tribal nations), reining them in under federal control without their consent. In the first case, Johnson v. M’Intosh (1823), to settle a land dispute between two white men and out of a need to more clearly define land law in the fledgling country, the court articulated the so-called doctrine of discovery, the idea that European religious and cultural superiority gave the US the superior right of title to land by virtue  of  discovery,  while  Native  nations  merely   possessed  the  right  of occupation, or usufruct rights. In the 1831 case Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, the court denied the independent existence of the Cherokee Nation, claiming they were a “domestic dependent nation,” likening the relationship as a ward to its guardian. The following year in the Worcester decision, the court asserted the primacy of the federal government to deal with Native nations, saying that the state of Georgia had no authority  over Indian affairs and giving  birth to the concept  of  inherent—but  limited—sovereignty.  More  than  one  and  a  half centuries of legal decisions and legislation have chipped away at Native nations’ control over their own lives and lands, resulting in a form of sovereignty they never agreed to, with many  nations having been stripped of their sovereignty altogether. The legal framework that governs the tribal-federal nexus forms the core of what is thought of as a settler colonial structure in a relationship of domination.28
EJ  for  Indigenous  peoples,  therefore,  must  be  capable  of  a  political  scale beyond the homogenizing, assimilationist, capitalist State. It must conform to a model that can frame issues in terms of their colonial condition and can affirm decolonization as a potential framework within which environmental justice can be made available to them. It must also recognize that racism is imbricated with colonialism in a logic that, as EJ geography scholars Anne Bonds and Joshua Inwood claim, “situates white supremacy not as an artifact of history or as an extreme position, but rather as the foundation for the continuous unfolding of practices of race and racism in settler states.”29
We might think  of this as a project to “Indigenize” environmental justice. Indigenizing EJ by centering Native issues means it should conform to principles

outlined  in  decolonizing   theories  and  Indigenous  research  methodologies, defined  as  “research  by  and  for  Indigenous  peoples,  using  techniques  and methods drawn from the traditions, and knowledges of those people.”30  While Indigenous  peoples’  lived  experiences  vary  from  place  to  place,  there  are common realities they all share in the experience of colonization that make it possible to generalize an Indigenous methodology  while recognizing specific, localized conditions. Maori scholar Linda Tuhiwai Smith (who broke ground with her book on decolonizing methodologies), quoting Franke Wilmer, notes that “the Indigenous voice speaks critically to the narrative (some would say the myth)  of  the  nation-state—the  hierarchical,  incorporative,  coercive  state  that exists,  in  part,  to  facilitate  the  process  of  creating  economic  surplus  on  an international scale.”31  Creating economic surplus is possible from not only the exploitation of Indigenous lands but the commodification of them also—that is, the  construction of  land as  property.  Such an  understanding  necessitates  the constant  migration  of  people,  which  relies  on  Indigenous  displacement  and disappearance.32
From  an  Indigenous  standpoint,  justice  must  transcend  the  distributive, capitalist  model.  Indigenous  modes  of  justice  typically  reflect  a  restorative orientation.  A  decolonized  American  justice  system  would  also  necessarily encompass  both  the  colonized  and  the  colonizer.  In  essence,  justice  for Indigenous peoples is about restoring  balance in relationships that are out of balance.33 In Western legal theory “laws hold insofar as those in economic and political  power  say  they  do,”  as  legal  scholars  Wanda  McCaslin and Denise Breton argue, but Indigenous peoples rarely experience Western law as either fair or equitable; for them, law is an enforcer of oppression.34  For this reason, McCaslin and Breton argue three points: (1) that decolonization is good for both the colonizers and the colonized because it can restore right relationship to all involved; (2) rule by force cannot somehow become benevolent or even benign; it punishes the colonized for who they are; and (3) colonization has steered the colonizers away from their own ancestral wisdom. Decolonizing the colonizers is necessary so that they can once again learn how to respect themselves and others.


C ULTURAL DIFFERENC E: C ENTERING INDIGENOUS WORLDVIEWS AND THE FAILURE OF THE EPA
The very  thing  that distinguishes Indigenous peoples from settler societies is their unbroken connection to ancestral homelands. Their cultures and identities

are linked to their original places in ways that define them; they are reflected in language,   place   names,   and   cosmology   (origin   stories).   In   Indigenous worldviews, there is no separation between people and land, between people and other life forms, or between people and their ancient ancestors whose bones are infused in the land they inhabit and whose spirits permeate place. Potawatomi scholar  Kyle  Powys  Whyte  refers  to  these  interconnections  as  systems  of responsibility. Based on his study of various Indigenous philosophies and how Indigenous  people  relate  to  land  and  the  environment,  Whyte  notes  that environmental injustice occurs when systems of responsibility between humans and the land are disrupted through the processes of colonization:

In  these  cases,  environmental  injustice  cuts  at  the  fabric  of  systems  of responsibilities that connect [nonhuman] people to humans, nonhumans and ecosystems. Environmental injustice can be seen as an affront to peoples’ capacities to experience themselves in the world as having responsibilities for  the  upkeep,  or  continuance,  of  their  societies.  .  .  .  Environmental injustice can be seen as occurring when these systems of responsibilities are interfered with or erased by another society in ways that are too rapid for indigenous peoples to adapt to without facing significant harms that they would not ordinarily have faced.35

So, it is the interruption of the collective continuance of a people that disables their  systems  of  responsibility,  which  are  built  upon  place-based  knowledge accumulated over eons. Throughout this book we will explore the nuances of these worldviews, particularly in chapter 7 on the topic of sacred sites and what constitutes  them  and  their  relationship  to  environmental  justice.  These  are inevitably  discussions  about  the  spiritual  foundations  of  Native  peoples  that inform all other aspects of life, including the political relationships that shape today’s  Native  nations.  This  section of  chapter 1,  however,  reveals  how  the philosophies undergirding cultural difference that Native peoples assert do, or conversely   do  not,  find  their  way   into  State-based  environmental  justice frameworks.36
Although   the   Environmental   Protection   Agency   was   formed   in   1970, American Indians were not substantively  included in the EPA policy  schema until 1984. That year, under the Reagan administration, the EPA issued its Policy for  the  Administration  of  Environmental  Programs  on  Indian  Reservations. Barely  four pages long, the document’s purpose was essentially  to affirm the trust-based government to government relationship between tribal nations and federal agencies.37 It acknowledged tribal governments as the primary parties for

standard   setting,   decision   making,   and   program   management   relative   to environmental policy on reservations. It also promised to take affirmative steps to assist tribes in those duties, to remove legal and procedural impediments to working effectively with tribal governments. It assured that tribal concerns and interests   were   considered   in   EPA   actions   that   may   affect   reservation environments, encouraged interagency cooperation with tribal governments, and pledged  to  incorporate  all  those  principles  into  the  agency’s  planning  and management activities. Despite these promises, the federal government’s efforts fell short and concerns were raised about the lack of effective consultation and collaboration  between  tribal   governments   and  federal   agencies.   With  the founding of the National Environmental Justice Advisory Council (NEJAC) in 1993, other policy statements were issued, such as the Guide on Consultation and Collaboration with Indian Tribal Governments and the Public Participation of Indigenous Groups and Tribal Citizens (November 2000), and Meaningful Involvement and Fair Treatment by Tribal Environmental Regulatory Programs (November	2004),	both	compiled	by	NEJAC’s	Indigenous	Peoples Subcommittee.
Both reports built upon the 1984 document, elaborating on tribal sovereignty and fleshing  out  the  finer  details  of  things  like  federal  Indian law,  effective consultation practices, public participation, interagency cooperation, and other administrative   functions   of   the   State   to   better   facilitate   tribal-federal relationships  in  the  realm  of  environmental  policy  and  law.  They  reflect  an expanding agenda that encompassed nonfederally recognized tribes, grassroots organizations,  sacred sites,  and international  human rights  and language  that recognized tribal models of fair treatment and meaningful public participation.
In 2011 the EPA’s Office of International and Tribal Affairs and Office of Environmental  Justice  commissioned  another  report  “to  provide  advice  and recommendations  about  how  the  Agency  can  most  effectively  address  the environmental justice issues in Indian country, including in Alaska and Hawaii and  those  facing  indigenous  peoples  both  on  and  off  reservations,”  asking Indigenous peoples for their input. Now called the Indigenous Peoples Work Group (formed in 2011), in 2013 the committee submitted its Recommendations for  Fostering Environmental  Justice  for  Tribes  and Indigenous  Peoples. The IPWG was an ad hoc eleven-member group of Indigenous advisors from diverse backgrounds,   including   representatives   of   tribal   governments,   Indigenous grassroots groups, environmental organizations, academia, and elders and youth. The commissioned report was the  first government effort to specifically  and comprehensively address environmental justice for Indigenous peoples.
The  IPWG  was  certainly   not  the  first  committee  to  be  composed  of

Indigenous  advisors,  as  the  prior  two  studies  under  the  Indigenous  Peoples Subcommittee  were  also  predominantly  staffed  by  Native  people.  The  EPA recommendations from 2000 and 2004 are notable for their prosovereignty and treaty-rights  positions,  empowering   Native  participation,  and  incorporating Native values into the federal administrative apparatus relative to environmental programs. Ultimately, however, the focus of the earlier recommendations was constrained by their deferral to federal law, problematically attempting to adapt Indigenous peoples’ needs to the existing domination-based legal structure. The historical context of colonialism was almost completely absent. But what was significant   about   the   2013  Recommendations   document   is   its   heightened attention to history, explicitly naming the processes of dispossession that have led to the environmental injustices faced by Indigenous peoples today. There is no whitewashing or sugarcoating of history here:

“Advanced”	knowledge,	innovation,	technology	and	wealth	have accelerated the insatiable need to feed, finance and advance growth and development, consuming  natural resources at a rate that exceeds Mother Earth’s  ability  to  restore.  At  the  same  time,  Indigenous  peoples  whose communities  and nations  pre-date  the  settler-state  have  maintained their unique relationships with the land, rivers, seas and sky. But in the 500 years since western contact, indigenous peoples have experienced dispossession and  disenfranchisement,   rendering   them   one   of   the   most   vulnerable subgroups on standard measures for quality of life and sustainability such as: poor health, obesity, unemployment, teen pregnancies, high school drop-out rates, drug abuse, incarceration, etc. . . .
EPA must  remain  vigilant  to  the  historical  reality  that  federal  policy recognizing  tribes’ separate  political  existence  and  sovereignty  depends upon the cultural distinctiveness of tribes from the larger American society. Institutions of tribal governance include extended kinship networks that “do not exist to reproduce or replicate dominant canons appearing in state and federal courts.” This “Dilemma of Difference” occurs even within tribes, such as the diversity of spiritual expression and the social contexts of tribal community members.38

The Recommendations document names some of the challenges facing Native peoples’   ability	to   maintain   traditional   lifeways   and   ancestral   places: sustainability of homelands, subsistence lifestyles, cultural and ancestral (sacred) sites, and environment-related health-care issues, including reproductive health and food insecurity. It recognizes the problems inherent in federal Indian law,

which   complicates   EJ   issues   due   to   jurisdictional   conflicts   and   whose sovereignty  prevails.  Further,  it  refers  to  President  Obama’s  2009  executive order on tribal consultation (Exec. Order No. 13175) and the UN Declaration on the  Rights  of  Indigenous  Peoples  (UNDRIP)  as  established  principles  upon which  to  build  a  federal  framework  for  Indigenous  EJ.  Several  aspects  of UNDRIP are invoked, including the right of free, prior, and informed consent. Numerous   suggestions   were   made   that   would   integrate   various   Native institutions, enabling  the engagement of the best and brightest of Indigenous peoples’ intelligentsia. One of its most important recommendations was for the EPA   to   establish   a   standing   Indigenous   Peoples   Environmental   Justice Committee or a standing NEJAC subcommittee. Overall, the document’s twenty-four   recommendations   contained   the   most   extensive   Indigenous-centered solutions ever offered to build an EJ foundation for Indigenous peoples. It might also be said that the Recommendations document paralleled and reflected the trajectory  of  Indigenous  studies  scholarship,  resisting  the  previous  pattern of deferring to State-based law and statutory agendas.
In  2014,  after  receiving  the  recommendations  from  NEJAC’s  Indigenous Peoples Work  Group, the EPA issued its Policy on Environmental Justice for Working	with	Federally	Recognized	Tribes	and	Indigenous	Peoples, supplementing its Plan EJ 2014, a roadmap designed to help the EPA integrate EJ into the agency’s programs, policies, and activities. It was written with the intent  to  create  standards  applicable  to  all  Indigenous  peoples  on  the  US continent and in Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Mariana Islands.39 In general, the seven-page document did not include any dramatically new policy statements, but for the most part simply reiterated many of the principles articulated in the previous guidelines, with updated language drawn from more recent executive orders and other policy implementation tools.
Noticeably  absent from the new policy  statement was any  reference to the United States’colonial history or some of the more specific problems Indigenous communities face that the Recommendations document detailed (especially food insecurity and subsistence lifeways). What it does mention is the EPA’s desire to integrate   Indigenous   traditional   ecological   knowledge   into   environmental science, policy, and decision-making processes “as appropriate and to the extent practicable  and  permitted  by  law,”  and  it  does  affirm  the  “importance”  of UNDRIP, but only to the extent that its principles are consistent with the mission and authority of the agency. It “seek[s] to be responsive to environmental justice concerns”   and   understand   definitions   of   health   and   environment   from Indigenous  perspectives.  No  standing   Indigenous  people’s  committee  was created  as   recommended.   This   policy   statement,   like   the   previous   ones,

emphasizes  the  language  of  “fair  treatment  and  meaningful  involvement”  of Indigenous communities. The document closes with the following disclaimer:

This document identifies internal Agency policies and procedures for EPA. This  document  is  not  a  rule  or  regulation  and  it  may  not  apply  to  a particular situation based upon the circumstances. This document does not change or substitute for any law, regulation, or any other legally-binding requirement and is not legally enforceable. As indicated by the use of non-mandatory language, this Policy does not create any judicially enforceable rights or obligations substantive or procedural in any person.40

The EPA’s obvious weaknesses explain, at least in part, how things went so horribly wrong with Standing Rock. For one thing, the disclaimer makes it clear that none of the Indigenous-affirming language used in the policy statement is legally  binding,  making  the  document  aspirational  only.  A more  cynical—or perhaps realistic—perspective would be that the EPA’s entire Indigenous policy stance amounts to no more than a façade, a ruse to cover for the more standard project of the State to hamstring Indigenous peoples’rights to self-determination, as  articulated  in  international  rights  agreements  like  UNDRIP  and  previous covenants like the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (which was affirmed in NEJAC’s 2004 policy report). And there’s plenty of evidence for this argument. In the EPA’s 2014 policy  statement, the language emphasized tribal “consultation” and “involvement,” as compared to language in UNDRIP, particularly the right to “free, prior, and informed consent.” Consent implies the power to veto any action a tribal government or people disagrees with, whereas consultation means that even if a community objects to a proposed project (like a pipeline),  it  has  no  power  to  stop  it,  and  the  federal  government  will  have theoretically  met  its  legal  obligation to “consult”  with them,  no matter  how flimsy such a consultation may actually have been. This is in fact what happened in the Standing Rock case, leading to the three federal departments’ (Interior, Justice, and Army) announcement to halt the DAPL having recognized that the tribe had not been adequately consulted. Needless to say, it took months of high-profile  demonstrations  for  the  agencies  to  come  to  this  conclusion.  Further bolstering  the argument that the federal government doesn’t really  believe in internationally  based rights to Indigenous self-determination is that when the Obama  administration  endorsed  UNDRIP  in  2010,  it  issued  a  fifteen-page announcement littered with disclaimers.41
In   the   Obama   announcement,   the   administration   asserts   the   dubious, unsupported   claim   that   the   “[UN]   Declaration’s   call   is   to   promote   the

development of a concept of self-determination for indigenous peoples that is different from the existing right of self-determination in international law.”42  It goes  on  to  emphasize  the  disclaimer  contained  in  UNDRIP  itself,  that  “the Declaration does not imply any right to take any action that would dismember or impair, totally or in part, the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and  independent  States”;  in  other  words,  moves  toward  independence.  Put another  way,  the  statement  argues  that  the  meaning  of  self-determination  is limited to domestic law, which as we have seen, is a dictatorial and colonial approach to the recognition of Indigenous self-determination. The rest of the administration’s announcement is spent in sanctimonious declarations about all the ways the US honors its relationship with Native Americans in its ongoing rehearsal of “benevolent supremacy.”43  Granted, Obama and his administration more than any  other honored Native nations’ political status, settled immense land claims, went out of the way  to visit reservations, and signed important executive  orders  addressing  some  of  the  most  pressing  problems  in  Indian country. But never has the federal government officially acknowledged the term “colonialism” to describe the sociopolitical and legal structure that still governs the  relationships  between the  US  and Indigenous  peoples.  When the  federal government does acknowledge its depredations, they are invariably sanitized as a simple “wrongdoing” or “mistreatment” consigned to a distant past.
To  summarize,  the  extent  to  which  the  US  government  has  incorporated Indigenous peoples into its environmental justice policy regime has, predictably, mirrored  and  replicated  its  hegemonic  relationship  to  Native  peoples  in  the language  of  benevolent  supremacy.  The  political  relationships  are  always evolving,  always  fragile,  and  subject  to  the  unpredictable  whims  of  the  US political   system.   And   it’s   been   Indigenous   peoples’  initial   assertions   of sovereignty that have led to what advances have been made in distinguishing an Indigenized EJ from a more mainstream EJ, based on a differentiated cultural, legal, and political status. Next, we turn to specific histories and circumstances that constitute a broadly defined concept of environmental injustice, rooted in the history of the US settler State.




C H A P T E R    T W O




Genocide by Any Other Name

A History of Indigenous Environmental Injustice

That those tribes cannot exist surrounded by our settlements and in continual contact with our citizens is certain. They have neither the intelligence, the industry, the moral habits, nor the desire of improvement which are essential to any favorable change in their condition. Established in the midst of another and a superior race, and without appreciating the causes of their inferiority or seeking to control them, they must necessarily yield to the force of circumstances and ere long disappear.

—PRESIDENT ANDREW JACKSON, IN HIS FIFTH ANNUAL MESSAGE, DECEMBER 3, 18331

Well before Andrew Jackson signed the Indian Removal Act in 1830, the writing was on the wall for the series of forced marches that would become known as the Trail of Tears. As early as 1822 the Chickasaw had begun moving west from their traditional lands in the Tennessee Valley, and thanks to the leadership and shrewd negotiating skills of their chief, Levi Colbert, their eventual relocation was better planned and financed compared to the other Southeastern tribes who were  forced  to  move  to  the  Indian  territory   in  Oklahoma.  Still,  Colbert admonished the US government, saying,

We never had a thought of exchanging our land for any other, as we think that we would not find a country that would suit us as well as this we now occupy, it being the land of our forefathers, if we should exchange our lands for any other, fearing the consequences may be similar to transplanting an old tree, which would wither and die away, and we’re fearful we would come to the same. . . . If we should consent [to come under the laws of the United States], we should be likened unto young  corn growing  and met with a drought that would kill it.2

Because of Colbert’s foresight, the Chickasaw relocation would prove to be less  horrific  than  that  experienced  by  the  Cherokee,  Creek,  and  Choctaw. Contained in the chief’s words is not only the anguish of forced removal; they also  vividly  capture  a  Native  worldview  that  makes  no  distinction  between people and land. The Chickasaw may  have survived removal and adapted to their new environment west of the Mississippi, but in reality, there is no way to measure   what   was   lost   in  the   process   of   being   deracinated  from   their homelands.3 The same is true for all Native peoples who have been severed from their  traditional  territories  and  forced  to  adapt  to  a  foreign  society.  As  this chapter asserts, the origin of environmental injustice for Indigenous peoples is dispossession of land in all its forms; injustice is continually reproduced in what is   inherently   a   culturally   genocidal   structure   that   systematically   erases Indigenous peoples’relationships and responsibilities to their ancestral places.
As the previous chapter delineates, the language of environmental justice is still fairly new in the US. Scholars are working to more clearly articulate what environmental injustice is and what justice means in Indian country, beginning with understanding that the principles of EJ in Indigenous communities should be  different  from  those  of  other  populations.  In  this  light,  we  might  even question the EPA’s definition of environmental justice for how well it does—or perhaps   more   important,   does   not—serve   Native   peoples.   The   statement “environmental justice is the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income, with respect to the development,   implementation,   and   enforcement   of   environmental   laws, regulations,  and  policies”  clearly  collapses  “all  people”  into  one  conceptual category, without making distinctions based on varied histories, experience, or political status. This definition is a universalizing, unidimensional approach that fails to account for different histories. We have seen that Indigenous peoples are defined by vastly different cultural orientations and a political relationship to the State.  As  statistics  consistently  show,  they  also  continue  to  suffer  from  a disproportionate  excess  of  social  ills  and  vulnerabilities  as  a  result  of  their histories  with  the  dominant  settler  society.  These  histories  are  critical  to informing how environmental justice for Indigenous peoples is conceived.
Native American EJ research and the policies and programs that are informed by  it must recognize these histories, but scholars note a lack  of research that critically  positions  contemporary  environmental  inequalities  within  historical processes.4 Take the example of a 1992 legal case with EJ repercussions. In State v. Elliot the court asserted that the Abenaki nation in New England no longer held aboriginal title to their ancestral homeland, negating  their rights to fish

outside the jurisdiction of the state of Vermont in keeping with federal Indian legal principles that protect treaty rights. At issue was whether the tribe could prove continual residence on their lands; the court rejected the tribe’s argument despite  an  exceedingly  complex  historical  record  that  proved  an  unbroken connection to the land.5 The court’s decision was a failure to acknowledge that the Abenaki had been systematically dispossessed of their lands, turning a blind eye on the history of violent settler incursions. In so doing the court contributed to a pattern of denial about the genocidal tendencies at the core of US history. Inquiries that ignore histories characterized by domination and oppression also ignore factors that shape perceptions of justice.6 When courts disregard histories of  dispossession,  delivering  legal  precedents  that  future  court  decisions  will build  upon,  the  action  constitutes  a  form  of  erasure  and  weakens  the  legal foundations upon which environmental justice might otherwise be constructed. Decontextualization, then—framing law absent documented history—is one way the State system fails Indigenous peoples’ ability to experience environmental justice.
Justice is further compromised by an inherently racist legal system formulated on the ideologies of domination and white supremacy. Scholars have long noted the complexity  and paternalism of federal Indian law. Even modern Supreme Court justices have critiqued the legal framework, stopping  short, though, of providing commentary about its fundamental injustices.7 As chapter 1 describes, the Marshall Trilogy forms the foundation of federal Indian law, beginning with the Christian doctrine of discovery, a framework that posits the innate cultural inferiority  of Native people based on their non-Christian belief systems. The dictum of domestic dependent nationhood was built on the discovery  theory, imposing a diminished conception of Indian self-determination, and created the trust doctrine in which the federal government assumes the role of trustee over Indian lands. But other legal doctrines at the core of federal Indian law place immense burdens of risk upon Native nations, most notably the plenary power doctrine. Plenary power is a legal invention affirmed by both the Supreme Court and the US legislature that vests Congress with plenary, or ultimate, authority over Indian affairs. There are times when Congress can be the friend of Indian country, even countering some of the court’s worst decisions. But they have also been Indian country’s worst nightmare, imposing laws and policies that erode tribal  self-determination.  And  because  of  Congress’s  ever-changing  nature, things can shift in unpredictable and disastrous ways depending on who is in power.  Central  to  the  discussion  about  the  role  of  history  in  environmental justice is that these core legal premises themselves resulted from viewpoints of

white men during periods of profound racism in American society. Their legal doctrines were paradoxically both ahistorical and founded in archaic religious doctrines of the Middle Ages Roman Catholic Church—and have never been repudiated.8
Evading history has other ramifications for Indigenous peoples when they are dislodged  from  their  own  social  and  political  contexts.  Kyle  Powys  Whyte poignantly argues this point when he claims that for Indigenous peoples,

injustice   also   occurs   when   the   social   institutions   of   one   society systematically erase certain sociological contexts, or horizons, that are vital for members of another society to experience themselves in the world as having responsibilities to other humans, nonhumans and the environment. Injustice, here, involves one society robbing another society of its capacities to experience the world as a place of collective life that its members feel responsible for maintaining. . . . Settler colonial societies seek to inscribe their  own  homelands  over  indigenous  homelands,  thereby  erasing  the history,  lived  experiences,  social  reality  and  possibilities  of  a  future  of indigenous peoples. . . . Settler colonialism can be interpreted as a form environmental  injustice  that  wrongfully  interferes  with  and  erases  the socioecological contexts required for indigenous populations to experience the world as a place infused with responsibilities to humans, nonhumans and ecosystems (emphasis added).9

Applying the lens of settler colonialism to the topic of environmental justice sheds a different light on the processes of history, providing irrefutable linkages between all eras and aspects of settler and Indigenous contact, environmental injustice, and genocide; they are inseparable. As a facet of settler colonialism, environmental injustice is linked with a larger ongoing process of Indigenous erasure that is built into the structure of the State. It began, and continues, as depriving Native peoples of the conditions necessary for life and the continuance of   cultural   existence,   what   can   be   called   “environmental   deprivation.” “Environmental deprivation,” as it is typically conveyed in academic literature and used by psychologists, refers to psychological and developmental health in children. Here, however, I seek to develop a different concept of environmental deprivation that relates to historical processes of land and resource dispossession calculated  to  bring  about  the  destruction  of  Indigenous  lives  and  cultures.10 Environmental deprivation in this sense refers to actions by settlers and settler governments that are designed to block Native peoples’ access to life-giving and culture-affirming resources. These actions are not new revelations of previously

unknown US histories; they  are familiar genocidal patterns, but viewed now through a lens focused on environmental factors. They  are acts of ecological disruption that constitute the origin of injustices toward Native peoples in what might  be  called  an Indigenous  peoples’ environmental  history  of  the  United States. What follows is a perspective on history  viewed through a prism that centers the effects of environmental deprivation on Indigenous peoples in the US.


DISMANTLING AND REFRAMING HISTORIC AL NARRATIVES
Conventional narratives of early US history have long been based on the virgin wilderness  hypothesis,  or  what  William  Deneven  (drawing   upon  a  well-established  American  literary  trope)  in  1992  infamously  called  the  “pristine myth.” The virgin wilderness construct presupposes a landscape unadulterated by human intervention, which imagined the Indigenous inhabitants incapable of (or unwilling to) alter their environments. At the same time, paradoxically, it implied a landscape largely devoid of human presence.11  Historians have long argued that diseases to which Indians had no immunity  solely  accounted for precipitous  declines  in  Native  populations  over  the  first  four  centuries  of European settlement. In recent decades, however, researchers challenge the idea that disease is solely  responsible for the rapid Indigenous population decline. The research identifies other aspects of European contact that had profoundly negative impacts on Native peoples’ ability  to survive foreign invasion: war, massacres,  enslavement,  overwork,  deportation,  the  loss  of  will  to  live  or reproduce, malnutrition and starvation from the breakdown of trade networks, and the loss of subsistence food production due to land loss.12 These deliberate tactics of physical and cultural destruction were relentlessly repeated during the United  States’ expansionist  march  across  the  continent  long  after  the  initial European settlements. In one way or another these are all environmental factors that  were  rooted  in  settlers  deliberately  blocking  Native  peoples’  access  to resources necessary for maintaining an Indigenous way of life.
In her acclaimed 2014 book  An Indigenous Peoples’ History of the United States, Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz renarrates the dominant story of American history, foregrounding  the  settler  colonial  practices  that  disrupted  North  American Indigenous ways of living, particularly their connection to land and water. An Indigenous  Peoples’ History  presents  the  settler  narrative  as  a  genealogy  of English colonialism and suggests that the settler colonial practices in the US have roots in England’s colonization of Scotland and Ireland, when the early seventeenth-century conquest and forced removal of Indigenous Irish from their

homelands resulted in the transfer of conquered Scottish populations to Ireland. It  is  this  population  of  displaced  Scots  Irish,  first  the  dominated,  who  then become the earliest settlers in North America, and eventually violent dominators, which became the model for English settlement in the New World.
Decentering the virgin wilderness myth, Dunbar-Ortiz “follows the corn” to reveal	vital	North	American	Indigenous	civilizations,	suggesting	an environmental  history.  She  retraces  ancient  trade  routes  between  North  and South America and reveals cultures built not on aimless nomadic wandering often narrated in conventional histories but on skillful cultivation of the land. Indigenous peoples up and down the Eastern Seaboard of North America and far inland maintained large farms where they grew corn, beans, squash, and other foods, while also practicing subsistence hunting and gathering. Successful game hunting  was  guaranteed  by  the  deliberate  maintenance  of  forest  landscapes through  management  techniques  like  controlled  burning.  But  the  arrival  of Europeans and their wars of domination led to massive disruption of Native life, setting off a cascade of catastrophic events. Dunbar-Ortiz notes, for example, that  settler  seizure  and  interruption  of  Indigenous  trade  routes  led  to  food shortages,   which   weakened   populations   and   forced   Indigenous   peoples’ dependency on the colonizers.
Referencing the work of military historian John Grenier, Dunbar-Ortiz says that one tactic of war by seventeenth-century settlers was the deliberate targeting of crops: Indigenous agricultural resources were systematically destroyed with the intention of (successfully) starving people out of their ancestral areas. She contends  that  it  was  the  onset  of  Bacon’s  Rebellion  in  1674  that  not  only codified slavery  of Africans in Virginia but also cemented genocidal policies against Indigenous peoples through the “creation of wealth based on landholding and the use of landless or land-poor settler-farmers as foot soldiers for moving the settler frontier deeper into Indigenous territories.”13
Two particular aspects of history—slavery and forced removals—are worthy of closer inspection to understand how the US enacted the genocidal tool of environmental  deprivation  upon  Native  peoples.  An  analysis  of  slavery  is relevant,  considering  recent  scholarship  that  uncovers  its  extent  in  Indian country. Seldom is slavery discussed in connection with Indigenous peoples, and when it is, it is consigned to an ancient, pre-State past, not recent American history.  But  more  recent  studies  reveal  how  various  forms  of  Indigenous bondage	contributed	to	genocidal	environmental	disruption	in	Native communities. Forced removal is often portrayed as limited to early  American and pre-American history, with the Trail of Tears as the best-known example. But  numerous  other  removal  events  and  modes  of  Indigenous  displacement

occurred as a result of federal policy and deserve examination for the ways they constitute environmental and cultural disruption.


SLAVERY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DISRUPTION
One of the least known and studied aspects of US history involves the centuries-long trade in Indian slaves. Only in the last decade or two have scholars begun in earnest to piece together and analyze the trade in Indigenous bodies introduced by  Christopher  Columbus  from  his  first  voyage  to the  New  World in 1492. Captivity   and  coerced  labor  was  not  a  new  phenomenon  introduced  by Europeans; numerous tribal groups across the continent practiced various forms of raiding and kidnapping, but such practices existed within cultural frameworks that ensured, among other things, a group’s survival, not for profit as was the case for Europeans. Such was the case, for example, in the Mourning Wars of the Haudenosaunee where captives were taken to replace murdered family members, also functioning to balance a group’s spiritual and political power. What was new  to Indian  country  was  the  commodified  practice  of  chattel  slavery  that defined the transatlantic economic system that swept them into the crosshairs of multiple colonizing powers. It’s true that Indians at times benefitted from the slave-based economies that characterized the Southeast, Southwest, and parts of the  Great  Basin,  as  they  became  inextricably  involved  in  an  ever-changing economic  landscape.  As  historian  James  Brooks  showed,  in  the  Southwest Indians were caught up in complex relationships of captivity and kinship through hundreds  of  years  of  interactions  with  Spanish,  Mexican,  and  American settlers.14 In the Great Lakes region, Native groups traded captives in diplomatic relations with the French.15 But, overall, the research shows that far more often Native peoples were victimized by slavery, which became a bigger contributor to the disruption of Indigenous cultural existence than was previously understood.
In  his  2016  book  The  Other  Slavery:  The  Uncovered  Story  of  Indian Enslavement  in  America,  author  Andrés  Reséndez  estimates  that  in  a  four-century  span (1492  to the  turn of  the  twentieth century)  between 2.5  and 5 million Indigenous peoples succumbed to slavery, a range that roughly coincides with  other  research.16    Studies  on  Native  American  slavery   are  generally concentrated regionally, owing to the wide variety of ways slavery manifested over four centuries in the US and pre-US. Reséndez contends that tracking this history  is  more  difficult  than  African  chattel  slavery  because,  among  other reasons, enslavement of American Indians was largely illegal and thus lacked a paper  trail,  while  there  is  copious  documentation  and  a  clear  set  of  laws governing African slavery and later, civil rights. The bondage of Native peoples

proliferated after US Statehood, predominantly in the Southwest and California. “The  American  occupation  of  the  West  did  not  reduce  the  enslavement  of Indians. In fact, the arrival of American settlers rekindled the traffic in humans,” Reséndez writes, revealing Indigenous slavery as a key tactic of American settler colonialism.17	Additionally,   his   research   resonates   with   other   important scholarship  showing  that  the  state  of  California  had  an  explicit  policy  of genocide  against  the  Indigenous  population,  with  various  forms  of  legalized bondage as part of its genocidal arsenal of weapons, well into the late nineteenth century.18
Bondage in any form meant catastrophic effects in the Native communities touched by  it, inevitably  involving  the breakdown of communities, continued loss of land, lack of access to food, and starvation. In Southern California, for example, one way bondage shaped the lives of Native people during the 1850s was  through  slave  markets  in  Los  Angeles.  California  laws  against  Native peoples were so brutal that European Americans effectively “created the state in such  a  way  as  to  make  being  a  Native  American  in  California  basically illegal.”19 The law legalizing Indian bondage in California was euphemistically known as “An Act for the Government and Protection of Indians” (1850–65). It created a system of indentured servitude of children and adults, characterized as “apprenticeship.” It also codified vagrancy, in which Indians were punished by being “hired” out to bidders in public auctions if they could not pay the bond or bail.20
With the  constant  illegal  settler  encroachments  into Native  lands  after  the Gold Rush, the legal system not only made it impossible for Indians to defend their lands but also falsely portrayed them as violent predators, thus justifying state and federally funded genocidal campaigns against them. In Los Angeles, the seizing of Native lands forced Indian people into a labor market designed to keep them in a revolving door of jail and unpaid labor, leading to extremely shortened life spans. The loss of lands and conscription into the labor market also meant the interruption of traditional food gathering and inability to tend to families. Calling it “an economy of slow starvation,” historian Brendan Lindsay pointed out that Indigenous populations would normally  have been gathering food  throughout  the  year  to  store  for  lean  times,  but  the  new  labor  regime prevented  it,  making  starvation  an  omnipresent  possibility  for  California’s Native  population.21   Native  food  sources  were  also  routinely  destroyed  by ranchers’ livestock  roaming  over  crops  and hunting  into scarcity  local  game Native people depended on.22
In New Mexico, the military pursuit of the Diné (Navajos) from 1863 to 1865

to relocate them onto a reservation in the eastern part of the state resulted in the death and enslavement of thousands. Reséndez describes a scorched-earth policy undertaken by General James Carlton, whose forces “would ravage the land— burning crops, orchards, and food stores; setting fire to hogans and teepees; and tracking Navajos over long distances—all while denying them food and shelter until  they  became  utterly  exhausted.  It  would  be  a  relentless  chase  through Navajo country.”23  The Diné had long  been settled in the region they  called Dinétah,  enabling  their  population  to  grow  to  twelve  thousand  through  the accumulation of large herds of sheep and development of fruit orchards and other crops that tied them to the land. Reséndez estimates that anywhere between one and three thousand Navajos fell victim to enslavement during this two-year period—upward of a quarter of the entire population—and that by the summer of 1865 “nearly  all propertied New Mexicans, whether Hispanic or Anglo, held Indian  slaves,  primarily  women  and  children  of  the  Navajo  nation.”24   This degree of disruption would have placed enormous strain on the Navajo’s ability to maintain community life, and as was true for Chickasaw relocation, there is no way to know what was lost to the Diné people during this time.
The   four-centuries-long   history   of   Indigenous   enslavement   cannot   be separated from the larger framework of US settler colonialism or dismissed as the irrelevant ghost of a bygone era. In the big picture, Indigenous people had been building their societies for at least twelve thousand years; four hundred years  for  them  is  recent  history.  Slavery’s  legacy  must  be  recognized as  an integral  part  of  the  systematic  effort  to  eradicate  Indigenous  cultures  by,  as Whyte  articulated,  interrupting   the  sociological  context  for  collective  life characterized by human responsibilities not only to each other but also to other nonhuman  relatives  in  their  respective  ecological  niches.  In  an  expanded understanding  of environmental injustice that takes into account all forms of settler  aggression,  enslavement  is  but  one  weapon  deployed  to  eradicate Indigenous  existence  by  separating  peoples  from  their  lands  and  collective responsibilities to them.


RELOC ATION AND DISPLAC EMENT
The military  campaign to contain the Diné is notoriously  known as the Long Walk and is one of countless instances in US history of forced removal and other forms of displacement of Indigenous peoples from their homelands. Some, like the Long Walk and the Trail of Tears, were dramatic marches at gunpoint. The Long Walk relocated the Navajo to the Bosque Redondo prison camp at Fort Sumner, approximately three hundred miles from their homelands to the west.

Three decades earlier the Trail of Tears, known as a particularly shameful era of American history, relocated the so-called Five Civilized Tribes—the Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, Seminole, and Choctaw—from their homes in various areas of the South to Indian Territory  (today’s Oklahoma) over a period of several years.  Others,  including  the  Chickasaw,  voluntarily  moved  early  on  under pressure of relentless settler encroachment. But the Trail of Tears is more widely associated with the Indian Removal Act signed into law by President Andrew Jackson in 1830 and the nefarious Cherokee Treaty  of New Echota (1835).25 Aside  from  the  loss  of  ancient  connections  to  homelands  and  sacred  sites, removal  had  immediately  disastrous  consequences,  including  the  deaths  of upward of 25 percent of those on the trail and the loss of life-sustaining livestock and crops. For most of those forcibly relocating from the southeastern United States, the new lands they came to in the central and eastern parts of Oklahoma resembled the lands they left behind, somewhat easing their transition, and they were  able  to  resume  most  aspects  of  their  previous  farming  and  ranching lifeways.   Choctaw   and  Chippewa   historian  Clara   Sue   Kidwell   from   the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill tracked the environmental changes of the southeastern Indians who relocated to the new lands. She notes that while prior  to  removal  they  had  already  begun  adapting  to  a  cash-based,  private-property  economic  system  with  their  adoption  of  many  European  customs (including the practice of slave owning), after their move west they had become more deeply entrenched into the American economic system with the discovery of coal deposits and the western expansion of the railroads on and through their lands.26  So while they adapted to their new environments, their relationship to land would change to fit the needs of an imposed capitalist system.
In  the  case  of  the  Diné,  the  forced  march  to  Bosque  Redondo  (called “Hwéeldi” in Navajo) on the banks of the Pecos River in 1864 had similarly devastating fallout. Several hundred of nine thousand died over eighteen days, and many more died after arriving to what was to be the first reservation in the west.27  Initially  intended for only  five thousand people, the forty-square-mile section of land proved incapable of supporting a population almost double the planned size. The water was brackish and there was not enough firewood. Crops failed,  as  did  the  irrigation  system  when  the  river  flooded.  Conflicts  with Apaches, who had been interned at Fort Sumner first, abounded, and mutual raiding between Comanches and the Fort Sumner prisoners added to the chaos. By 1868 the Bosque Redondo experiment had failed and the federal government entered into a treaty  with the Navajos, sending them back  to their traditional territory after four years marked by starvation and widespread suffering.

In  a  lesser-known  incident,  in  coastal  Northern  California  several  Pomo groups were forcibly marched to what is today the Round Valley reservation in Mendocino County. In the mid-1850s Round Valley was known as Nome Cult (thought to mean “west place” in an unrelated Native language), the traditional dwelling  place  of  the  Yuki  people.  California  was  deeply  engaged  in  its explicitly genocidal campaign against the Indigenous populations, and state and federally funded private militias identified Nome Cult as a convenient, out-of-the-way  place to deposit Indian prisoners who had not otherwise been killed, even though much of it was now under white ownership. Around 1857 militia groups began clearing out entire villages as far south as Sonoma County, force-marching them under threat of violence in what has been passed down in Pomo oral histories as the “death march.” The tales tell of the death of babies and elders,  and  great  misery.28   Once  there,  they  faced  hunger  due  to  always-insufficient  government  food rations  and the  inability  to gather  enough wild foods on lands now claimed by whites. Rape was rampant, and children were always under threat of kidnapping to be sold into California’s legalized slave trade.
Countless other displacements occurred before and after the Trail of Tears, the Long  Walk,  and  the  Pomo  Death  March,  often  accompanied  by  wars  of annihilation or massacres. They fill volumes in a massive literature on American Indian  history  and  need  not  all  be  recounted  here  to  make  the  point  that environmental disruption via forced displacement constitutes the foundation of what we think of today as Indigenous environmental injustice. Some removals were  not  as  overtly  deadly  as  others,  but  they  nonetheless  catastrophically interrupted an Indigenous community’s ability to maintain itself and, as Whyte says,  its  “responsibilities  to  other  humans,  non-humans,  and  ecosystems.”29 Other  notable  displacements  include  the  following  examples.  The  Shawnee, originally an Eastern Woodlands people, were scattered into several bands due to relentless  white  encroachment  beginning  in  1793.  As  a  result  of  numerous imposed treaties before and after the Civil War and further displacements, the Shawnee exist as three separate, federally recognized tribes in Oklahoma.
Like the Shawnee, the Kickapoo were split into several groups and removed from their territory in what became Illinois. A total of ten treaties between 1795 and 1854 divided them into the Kickapoo Tribe in Kansas, the Kickapoo Tribe in Oklahoma, the Texas Band of Kickapoo, and the Mexican Kickapoo.
The  Ponca  were  driven  out  of  their  homelands  by  the  Niobrara  River  in today’s Nebraska in 1877 in what is remembered as the Ponca Trail of Tears. Over a period of eighteen months, about one-third of five hundred people died

on  their  way   to  the  swamplands  of  the  Quapaw  agency   in  northeastern Oklahoma.  The  Quapaw  themselves  had  been  relocated  in  1834  from  their original lands in Arkansas to the Indian Territory.
The  Medicine  Lodge  Treaty  in  1867  removed  Comanches,  Kiowas,  and Kiowa Apaches (Plains Apache) from their territories in Texas, confining them to reservations in Oklahoma, where starvation and illness dramatically reduced their populations. The same treaty  reduced the size of the reservation of the Southern Cheyenne and Arapaho in Oklahoma by more than half.30
Paiutes in southeastern Oregon were forced off their lands on the Malheur Indian Reservation after the cessation of the Bannock War in 1878 and moved to the  Yakama  Reservation  in  Washington,  after  which  the  federal  government terminated the reservation and opened it to white settlement. In 1972 just 771 acres were restored to what is now the Burns Paiute Indian Reservation.31
The Modoc in northeastern California were forced into a treaty ceding their lands in exchange for their relocation to the Klamath reservation in 1864. With the land unable to provide sufficient food for all the Indians, a band of Modoc returned to their ceded lands at Tule Lake and engaged in an armed conflict with the US Army  for several months before their defeat in 1873. Survivors were exiled  to  the  Quapaw  reservation,  resulting  in  a  Modoc  diaspora  between Oklahoma and Oregon.
Removal of Native communities from their ancestral lands was not confined to the earliest years of the republic, as the example of the Standing Rock and other Sioux nation reservations shows. As noted previously, the Pick Sloan Act of 1944 created a series of dams in the territory of the Great Sioux Nation that without consent displaced more than one thousand Native families. The building of dams has historically delivered some of the most devastating blows to Native communities. Flooding caused by dams dislocated entire towns and destroyed fishing  sites,  contributing  to starvation and poverty  inflicted by  US  policies. They were part of large-scale efforts to engineer landscapes to serve growing populations and accompanied a new belief in the need to “preserve” wilderness as the limits to continental expansion loomed. With the birth of the conservation and national parks movement in the mid-1800s, tribal peoples continued to be pushed out of their homes, fueled by  the theory  of Manifest Destiny  and the view that Indians were an impediment to progress.
Finally, Native displacement continued under the federal government’s mid-twentieth-century  termination policy.  Formulated as  a  “final  solution”  to the United States’ “Indian problem,” House Concurrent Resolution 108 (passed in 1953) and its companion Public Law 280 sought to end the government’s treaty-

based legal responsibility to Native people. Cloaked in the language of liberating Native peoples from US “supervision,” termination envisioned the dissolution of reservations, the abdication of federal protections for tribal lands and cultures, and  the  end  of  federal  services  to  Indians.  Free  from  the  yoke  of  federal paternalism, Indians would finally disappear into the social fabric of America, undifferentiated from all other American citizens. Termination included a plan to relocate reservation Indians to cities under the guise of a jobs program, where they  were  given  one-way  tickets  to  New  York,  Chicago,  Los  Angeles,  San Francisco, Minneapolis, and other cities. Relocation amounted to a wholesale population transfer  away  from  reservations  to urban environments,  and as  a result,   today   most   American   Indians   live   away   from   their   reservation communities.   Under   the   termination   policy   109   tribes   lost   their   federal recognition (over one-third of them in California alone) and thus their political relationship to the US, affecting  1,369,000 acres of Indian lands and 12,000 Native people.32
While   many   urban   Native   people   today   maintain   connection   to   their homelands, their lives and identities are mediated and shaped by these histories of  dispossession  and  displacement.  To  be  an  urban  Indian  is  to  live  under diasporic conditions, sometimes by choice, but more often by circumstances of birth. It is a state of disconnection from land and the culture and lifeways that emanate  from  land,  such as  language,  ceremonial  or  religious  practices,  and traditional  food  and  medicine  knowledge.  Even  considering  the  remarkable resiliency  Indigenous  peoples  have  shown  since  European  colonization,  this legacy  of  loss  has  still  come  to  be  a  defining  characteristic  of  Indigenous identity.  In both urban and reservation settings,  Native  identities  are  formed against  a  backdrop  of  historical  tragedy  and  ongoing  injustice,  which  often involves  the  continued  struggle  to  defend  what  remains  of  ancestral  lands, territories, resources, and cultures.


C ONNEC TING GENOC IDE AND ENVIRONMENTAL INJUSTIC E
To be a person of direct Indigenous descent in the US today is to have survived a genocide of cataclysmic proportions. Some Native people have described the experience  of  living  in  today’s  world  as  postapocalyptic.33   Based  on  sheer numbers, if we assume an estimate of eighteen million Indigenous people on the continent north of Mesoamerica in 1492 and compare that number to the Native American population count of roughly 228,000 in the 1890 census—the nadir of the Native American population—we see a population decline of approximately 99 percent.34

Well after the cessation of the Indian wars in the late nineteenth century, the legacy of loss continued with the imposition of a policy of assimilation and the systematic forced removal of children from their families during the boarding-school  era  (roughly   1887–1934)—what’s  been  called  the  second  of  four removals.35   This  legacy  cannot  be  overstated,  and  a  growing  awareness  of intergenerational and historical trauma recognizes the social and psychological implications that histories of genocide and colonialism have had on American Indigenous populations.36  Pervasive social problems such as substance abuse, mental illness, violence against women, and high suicide rates in Indigenous communities are broadly connected with oppressive government policies of the past and present, to which scholars often explicitly apply the terms “genocide” and “holocaust.” And yet, while the US government has issued official apologies acknowledging its “mistreatment” of Native Americans (or its role in the illegal overthrow   of   the   Native   Hawaiian   Kingdom   government),   it   has   never acknowledged genocide in any form.37
Genocide in the US context has been the topic of contentious debate among historians for decades—it is almost taboo—and only in the past decade or two has it become acceptable to even use the term, given the whitewashing that has characterized most US historical narratives. But a new generation of scholarship in genocide studies is articulating the subtler nuances of genocide, recognizing the ways it has manifested in modern history in varying contexts. Scholars have pointed out, for example, one problem in recognizing genocide is that the Jewish Holocaust (which gave rise to Raphaël Lemkin coining the term “genocide” in the mid-1940s) is too often the sole benchmark against which all other incidents of ethnic cleansing are measured, limiting the scope of what might rightly be seen as genocide. Some contend that too broad a definition can render the term meaningless. Others still have argued that genocide can be genocide only if there is evidence of a deliberate intent of a State or government to annihilate an entire population. Another strand in the research relative to the American Indian case is that assessing genocide might best be taken on a group-by-group or region-by-region basis, where intent is more obvious in certain places and cases. The best example is in California where, drawing again on the work of Brendan Lindsay and Benjamin Madley, the case for genocide against California Indians is far clearer.
The point of naming genocide as an aspect of United States history is not to create a legal case against the US based on international law, nor is it to assign hierarchies  or  degrees  of  victimhood.  It  is  ultimately  to establish a  standard against  which  the  inherent  contradictions  in  US  history  and  narratives  of

democracy and freedom might be understood—and how this history constructs the present, continuing to stifle Indigenous peoples’ ability to experience justice. In his now-classic 2006 essay, “Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native,” the late Patrick Wolfe elaborates on the concept of genocide, linking it with  settler  colonialism.  While  not  all  genocidal  events  arise  out  of  settler colonialism, he asserts,  settler colonialism,  with its mandate  to eliminate the Native, is fundamentally genocidal. Arguing that settler colonialism is a “larger category than genocide,” he suggests the term “structural genocide” to describe the  logic  of  elimination  at  the  foundation  of  a  settler  State  like  the  US.38 Structural genocide recognizes the myriad forms Native elimination takes and situates  it  as  an  ongoing  process.  Elimination  as  a  process  hinges  on  the expropriation of Indigenous lands and their transfer into settler possession via regimes of private property ownership, beginning with war, killing, and forced removal.   All   other   techniques   of   elimination  flow   from   there,   including assimilation   policies   that   remove   children   from   families,   imposition   of citizenship, religious conversion, and blood quantum policies, among others.
Acknowledging  environmental  injustice  as  a  process  of  settler  colonialism means recognizing the larger historical arc of contact between Native and settler people and how the environmental disruptions imposed on Native people by that process linger today in myriad ways, as the many examples in this book reveal. It is beyond wrongdoing or mistreatment, a phenomenon consigned to the past. The United Nations 1948 Convention on Genocide and the Rome Statute of 2002 recognize genocide as a range of acts that aim to “destroy, in whole or in part,  a  national,  ethnical,  racial  or  religious  group,”  including  “deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part.”39  In a separate document, the United Nations incorporates   into   its   analytical   framework   for   determining   genocide   the assessment  of  “less  obvious  methods  of  destruction,  such  as  the  deliberate deprivation of resources needed for the group’s physical survival and which are available to the rest of the population, such as clean water, food and medical services”  (emphasis  added).40   While  the  analytic  framework  offered  by  the United Nations  only  briefly  touches  upon ways  environmental deprivation is genocidal  conduct,  the  history  of  the  United  States’  relationship  to  Native peoples described in this chapter fits this description.
It is more than a little ironic that the historian Raphaël Lemkin, the one who defined  genocide,  was  most  influenced  by  his  extensive  study  of  European colonialism, including the United States, and not predominantly by the Jewish Holocaust, as is commonly  asserted. The traits he identified in the genocidal

behavior of Europeans were less outright physical killing and more the cultural effects of colonial invasion (which inevitably  involved slavery). For Lemkin, cultural genocide precedes actual physical genocide. Genocide has two phases: first,  the  destruction  of  the  national  pattern  of  the  oppressed  and  then  the imposition of the national pattern of the oppressor. Fundamentally, “[Lemkin] regarded  genocide  as  comprising  an  ensemble  of  policies  and  practices  that attack the ‘foundations of national life,’” write Michael McDonnell and A. Dirk Moses, scholars of Lemkin’s work.41  The environmental disruptions imposed upon American Indians as described in this chapter undeniably fit a pattern of destroying the foundations of national life. Had Lemkin understood the extent to which relationship to place and land formed national identity in the ways Native scholars articulate today, it’s not difficult to imagine him factoring the imposed severing of these relationships into his conception of genocide.
The  United Nations  currently  does  not  recognize  colonialism  as  genocide, which is not surprising  given that the most powerful members of the United Nations are colonial States. But a preponderance of the research in genocide studies in recent years recognizes Lemkin’s foundation on cultural genocide and argues for expanded definitions of genocide. These new definitions include the concepts of social death and ecocide. Distinguished from mass killings, social death can be seen as the “central evil” of genocide: the loss of identity and social relationships  as  the  context  for  community.42  The  minutia  of  social  death is debated by scholars, but by and large social death describes cultural genocide.
Environmental  injustice  as  environmental  disruption and structurally  based cultural   genocide   gives   us   another   frame   from   which  to  conceive   what environmental justice might look like, beyond the reductive and limited concept of   environmental   racism.   To   state   it   simply:   if   settler   colonialism   is environmental  injustice  and settler  colonialism  is  a  genocidal  structure,  then environmental   justice   as   an   analytic   framework	must   be   capable   of acknowledging the extent to which historical environmental disruption structures Native lives today and should factor in to the formation of EJ laws and policies. Next, we turn to ways colonial impositions continue to complicate the rebuilding of Indigenous national life and interfere with Indigenous peoples’responsibilities to their nonhuman relatives.




C H A P T E R    T H R E E




The Complicated Legacy of Western Expansion and the Industrial Revolution


We knew that the White Man will search for the things that look good to him, that he will use many good ideas in order to obtain his heart’s desire, and we knew that if he had strayed from the Great Spirit he would use any means to get what he wants. These things we were warned to watch, and we today know that those prophecies were true because we can see how many new and selfish ideas and plans were being put before us. We know that if we accept these things we will lose our land and give up our very lives.

—DAN KATCHONGVA, HOPI ELDER TO CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEE, 19551

In an arresting painting by Yakama and Pawnee artist Bunky Echo-Hawk titled Natural Resource Management, two people are shown in the foreground wearing ominous-looking  gas  masks.  One  is  dressed in suit  and tie  and is  holding  a briefcase, while the other is adorned in a feather headdress and dons a judge’s robe, with what seems to be a gavel in hand, which is mysteriously connected to the gas mask. In the background is an oil-drilling rig and what appears to be an industrial  facility,  with  purple  snowcapped  mountains  rising  skyward  from behind. The painting is part of a series of gas mask paintings that Echo-Hawk describes  in  his  original  artist  statement  as  signifying  the  ways  the  federal government  has  waged  biological  warfare  on  Indians,  from  the  smallpox-infested blankets given to the Ottawas by Lord Jeffrey Amherst in 1763 to the nuclear waste leaked from the Hanford Nuclear Site in Washington State from 1944 to the 1970s, contaminating Yakama and Spokane reservation lands. The images also represent the dualities of traditional and contemporary Native life and the perseverance of culture and religion, “the stark  reality  that we have survived,” Echo-Hawk says.2  Another interpretation that might be drawn from this  particular  image,  however,  especially  given  the  painting’s  title,  hints  at Native peoples’ sometimes paradoxical relationship to the environment. In this

paradox, the image suggests, Indigenous peoples’ relationships with land is in potential  conflict  with  their  needs  for  economic  development,  leading  to contentious   battles   and   agonizing   decisions   in   Native   communities.   The juxtaposition of undeveloped nature, on one hand, and industrial intervention on the  environment,  on  the  other,  seems  to  insinuate  difficult  if  not  obvious questions: Can Native people respect the integrity of their nonhuman relations in accordance with their cultural imperatives to honor the land and simultaneously extract the Earth’s resources to escape poverty? Are there ethical limits, and if so, how are they defined and implemented?
While Indigenous peoples’ relationship to land is forged through thousands of years of experience, colonization has also imposed changes. In writing about Cherokee efforts to protect traditional medicinal plants, Cherokee ethnobotanist Clint Carroll points out how these changes have resulted in contrasting  land management  paradigms,  rooted  in  the  language  of  “resource-based”  versus “relationship-based” approaches, a binary imposed on tribal governments by the Bureau of  Indian Affairs  through their  historically  paternalistic  relationship.3 Having  consolidated  its  power  over  tribal  lands  during  the  height  of  the industrial revolution in the late 1800s, the federal government compelled Native peoples to use land productively (that is, profit generation via farming, ranching, and so on) in keeping with European standards of land use. This solidified into a deeply  entrenched bureaucratic structure that still drives much of the federal-tribal  relationship  and  determines  how  tribal  governments  use  their  lands, sometimes in ways that contribute to climate change and, in extreme cases, ways that lead to human rights abuses (as in the Three Affiliated Tribes of the Fort Berthold reservation’s exploitation of the Bakken oil fields). Industrialism itself has  played a  central  role  in consolidating  settler  power  over  Native  nations, contributing to their confinement to some of the most undesirable lands on the continent and cutting them off from some of the best. It was no small irony when some  of  those  perceived  “wastelands”  were  later  found  to  contain  valuable substances  coveted  by  energy  and  new  technology  sectors,  presenting  what would be simultaneously a blessing and a curse for the nations. Bunky Echo-Hawk’s  haunting  painting  performs  a  visual  critique  of  the  confluence  of political and economic greed imposed on North American Indigenous peoples in an  ongoing  struggle  to  balance  economic  development  with  environmental protection. While the entire history and structure of settler colonialism is riddled with   environmentally   disruptive   events,   this   chapter   examines   ways   the industrial revolution created for Indigenous peoples a complicated relationship between resource extraction and economic development that risks pitting Native peoples against their own values, and potentially even each other.



IMPERIAL DREAMS AND INDIGENOUS PERSPEC TIVES
In the  annals  of  US  history,  and as  it  is  taught  to American schoolchildren, westward expansion is a natural outgrowth of advances in technology that would revolutionize  farming   and  other  aspects  of  everyday   life,  facilitating   the transition from an agriculturally based economy to an industrialized economy. With technology  innovations imported to the New World from Britain in the 1700s, new inventions like steam-powered engines, for example, enabled the construction  of  large-scale  mills  and  the  invention  of  locomotives,  which contributed to greater efficiency in farming. Advances in weaving technology and the invention of the cotton gin helped convert a mostly wool-based textile industry to cotton, reentrenching the slave trade in the South, which of course was a major cornerstone of the global economy until the US Civil War in the nineteenth century. With the explosive increase of immigration on the Eastern Seaboard and burgeoning urbanization, the insatiable demand for land placed pressure   on  the   US   settler   government   to  continue   invading   Indigenous territories.  Other  factors,  like  the  discovery  of  resource-rich  land  in  Texas, California, and Alaska, also contributed to the US pursuit of westward expansion and territorial grabs.
Settler expropriation of Indigenous lands required a logic that could be woven into the legal fabric of the US. This logic was explicitly stated in 1823 in the first Supreme Court case involving Indians, Johnson v. M’Intosh, when Chief Justice John Marshall opined,

On the discovery of this immense continent, the great nations of Europe were  eager  to  appropriate  to  themselves  so  much  of  it  as  they  could respectively acquire. Its vast extent offered an ample field to the ambition and  enterprise  of  all;  and  the  character  and  religion  of  its  inhabitants afforded an apology  for considering them [the Indians] as a people over whom the superior genius of Europe might claim an ascendency.4

And just like that, with the stroke of a pen, Marshall invented the Christian doctrine of discovery, which would become the legal rationale for the continued violent appropriation of Indian lands and the engine powering federal Indian law still  in  place  today.  After  the  court’s  articulation  of  the  discovery  doctrine, President Jackson would sign the Indian Removal Act in 1830, expelling the Cherokee and the other four of the so-called Five Civilized Tribes from their homelands in Georgia and the broader south, setting the stage for removal as

federal Indian policy. As Native peoples were being forced into new territories, the US continued its aggressive push westward under the mantra of Manifest Destiny, pressuring tribes for land-ceding treaties while Indigenous resistance in the Great Plains led to increased military violence and genocidal massacres.5
The  religious  underpinnings  of  both  doctrines  were  not  only  obvious  but shamelessly exploited as part of a white supremacist system bent on maintaining power over nonwhite, non-Christian people, as Justice John Marshall’s language in Johnson makes clear. Marshall’s views were backed by his colleague on the bench and close friend, Associate Justice Joseph Story, who elaborated on the concept of discovery, linking it to ancient Roman Catholic edicts contained in fifteenth-century papal bulls.6 Story’s opinion explicitly and extensively drew on the church’s language about Indigenous ignorance, savagery, and heathenism to make the case that Christian European’s “discovery” of the continent gave them superior rights to land title.7  Unpacking the doctrine of discovery  and how it constructs the United States’ legal relationship with Native nations, Shawnee Lenape legal historian Steve Newcomb describes it as the “conqueror model.” Simply put, the conqueror model is a cognitive construct created by the State to maintain a  relationship of  domination over  Indigenous  peoples  based on the religious justifications provided by the US Supreme Court. It implies that the State possesses a divine right to dominate and subdue Indigenous peoples.8
The religiously  based conqueror model extended to an ideology  of human superiority over the natural world; it is an anthropocentric worldview in which the  world  is  there  for  human  taking,  manipulation,  and  exploitation  without regard for the consequences to either human or nonhuman life. So it was that paradigms  derived  from  ancient  European  religious  and  secular  traditions provided  the  necessary  justifications  for  violent  land  theft  and  control  over Native   peoples   that   made   western   expansion   possible.   The   conceptual groundwork was laid for a capitalist future of hyperexploitation of the natural world, and with the intractable poverty the American system inflicted on Native nations, so too would they be subjugated to the new system, willingly or not.


RAILROADING THE NATIONS
With  enough  Indian  lands  surrendered  across  the  continent,  the  US  could continue expanding not only settlement but also its infrastructure, facilitated by the locomotive. This history is frequently told as a triumphal story of an era of explosive settler population growth and the consolidation of US control over the continent, which could occur only if the hundreds of tribal nations that existed

across the vast expanse of land were sufficiently contained. The transcontinental railroads not only enabled this process but also accelerated it exponentially. The predominant  narrative  celebrates  the  railroads  as  the  technological  marvel necessary   for  the  forward  progress  of  a  superior  civilization  with  tragic consequences for Indian people. From an Indigenous perspective, however, it is the story of a misguided society’s moral failing due to its desire for progress that foreclosed the  ability  of  entire  cultures  to survive  in their  environments  and maintain  responsibilities  to  their  nonhuman  relations.  Further,  the  expansion enabled by the railroads led to the construction of mythological narratives rooted in  the  vanishing  Native  trope  that  still  prevents  them  from  being  perceived accurately (or fairly) by the dominant society.9
Consider that in 1840 there existed fewer than 3,000 miles of railroad track, which would increase tenfold over the next twenty years. By 1880 there were 115,000  miles  of  track  traversing  the  US,  facilitating  the  stunning  national economic  transformation that  characterized the  twentieth century.10  This  was made possible by the treaties aggressively pursued by US lawmakers, forcing massive land transfers with increasingly harsh terms as the nineteenth century progressed into the twentieth and the balance of military power shifted to favor the US (aided by the railroads themselves).11
The  treaties  also created reservations  that  would confine  Native  people  to territories   far   smaller   than   they   had   for   millennia   been   accustomed   to, diminishing their ability to feed themselves. Efforts to push Indians out of the way to make room for the railroad, which included eliminating Native claims to the lands concerned, ramped up in the 1850s with the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854) and persisted for a period of approximately  twenty-five years. The period known as the Indian Wars, sparked by unrestricted and often illegal  white  settlement  combined  with  Native  resistance  to  confinement  on reservations,  roughly  paralleled  the  building  of  the  transcontinental  railroad. With the completion of the railroads and the consolidation of US power over American Indians, the Indian Wars would come to an end. In 1883 General William Tecumseh Sherman connected these events, speculating that aside from “‘occasional spasmodic and temporary alarms . . . the railroad . . . has become the greater cause.’ The recent completion of the fourth transcontinental line, he [Sherman] added, ‘has settled forever the Indian question.’”12 In a very real way the railroads were the death knell to an independent Indigenous existence.
The railroads bisected huge tracts of Indian lands, cutting Native peoples off from their traditional homelands and even removing them altogether, as was the case  with the  Shawnee.  Some  were  defrauded in other  ways;  the  Delaware,

Kickapoo,  and  Shoshone,  for  example,  were  deceitfully  persuaded  that  their lands would be enhanced with a railroad running  through them.13  While the railroads wreaked havoc on Indian lives in numerous ways, one of the most destructive and tragic outcomes of the United States’ industrial expansion was the  near  extermination of  the  Plains  buffalo herds,  with the  railroads  as  the strategic prerequisite to carry out the plan. With numbers in the tens of millions in  the  early  nineteenth  century,  buffalo  had  for  centuries  been  an  abundant resource that provided food and nearly everything else the hunting cultures of the Northern and Southern Plains peoples needed for a comfortable, sustainable lifestyle. Militant Indian resistance to reservation life vexed the United States’ efforts  to  safely  settle  westbound  migrating  populations,  so  a  more  extreme strategy  aimed at starving Indians into submission ensued. Historians identify General Sherman as its main architect, and the army principally responsible for the demise of the buffalo. Even Congress stepped in to try to curb the carnage; despite  its  attempt  to pass  legislation in 1874  to limit  the  buffalo slaughter, Sherman’s malicious genius proved triumphant when army veteran and president Ulysses   S.   Grant   vetoed   the   legislation.   So   extreme   was   the   buffalo extermination that by  the 1890s fewer than one thousand remained, scattered mostly on private ranches.14  And without their ancient food source, the Indian nations were forced into confinement on remote reservations and succumbed to the next wave of oppressive federal Indian policy, assimilation.
The near disappearance of the buffalo directly  paralleled the experience of Native nations when the 1890 census counted a scant 228,000 American Indians, the nadir of their population compared to precontact populations. A growing awareness of the apocalyptic collapse of the Native population, a national feeling of  mourning  for  the  closing  of  the  American  frontier,  and  anxieties  about modernity combined to create a new American sensibility that waxed nostalgic about the tragedy  of the American Indian. The country  now made safe from marauding, savage Indians, Americans could afford to indulge their humanity and pity the “plight” of the Indian, who was perceived to be disappearing into the mists of time. In their rush to preserve the last remaining vestiges of the vanishing  Indian,  documentarians  like  Edward Curtis  went to reservations  to capture their images on film for posterity, even artificially staging many of the now famous photos. Hollywood filmmakers created the first moving pictures, which	inevitably	depicted	Indians	before	their	final	disappearance. Anthropologists memorialized “extinct” Indian peoples, searching frantically for anything left to preserve of pure, “authentic” cultures and individuals, in what anthropologists today call salvage ethnography.

The  persistence  of  the  vanishing   Indian  narrative  in  American  society represents  a  collective  inability  to  perceive  Native  people  as  survivors—as peoples with viable, living cultures that although altered and adapted to modern circumstances are nonetheless authentic and vibrant. The narrative has spun off into dozens of stereotypes and misconceptions that dehumanize them and keep them frozen in racist legal and policy frameworks that continue to deny them full access to their own lands and control over their own lives and resources.


DAMMING RIVERS, DAMNING C ULTURES
As  the  railroads  were  snaking  their  way  across  the  continent,  altering  the landscape  and  disrupting  Indigenous  lives  to  build  American  economic  and industrial infrastructure, engineering technology was also being put to service to harness the power of the continent’s rivers and watersheds. In the words of one historian, Theodore Steinberg,

As the [nineteenth] century progressed, a consensus emerged on the need to exploit  and  manipulate  water  for  economic  gain.  A  stunning  cultural transformation  was  taking  place,  a  shift  in  people’s  very  perception  of nature.  By  the  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  it  was  commonly assumed,  even  expected,  that  water  should  be  tapped,  controlled,  and dominated in the name of progress—a view clearly reflected in the law.15

Dams were central to accomplishing those goals. They were designed for a variety  of  purposes,  including  flood control,  water  storage  and delivery,  and electricity  generation as an integral part of the US economy. But while dams were  contributing  to  American  prosperity,  and  at  times  provided  benefits  to Native communities (jobs, and eventually economic development and recreation opportunities), their net effect in Indian country has historically been disastrous, particularly   throughout   the   twentieth  century.   Those   impacts   range   from population displacement to environmental disruption so extreme that subsistence livelihoods  were  eliminated,  which  in  turn  has  reflected  in  negative  health outcomes for tribal communities and ongoing trauma. The environmental effects of dams are well known, including the inundation of entire ecosystems, impacts on temperatures and changes in nutrient and toxin concentration in rivers, and increasing  erosion  and  sediment  deposition.16   Reservoirs  created  by  dams encourage  the  proliferation  of  nonnative  invasive  species;  and  large  dams contribute to the extinction of indigenous species of fish; disappearance of birds; loss of forests, wetlands, and farmlands; erosion of coastal deltas; and many

other issues. Riverbed deepening (“incising”) can even lower underground water tables.17  Human communities  are  affected  by  the  decline  in traditional  food sources when fish species (most notably salmon) and other riparian and wildlife food sources disappear. Decreased reliance on traditional foods is directly related to increases in food-related diseases, such as diabetes.
Studies   show   that   population   displacement   has   especially	damaging consequences on children and the elderly, due to a lack of basic necessities for good  health,  such  as  shelter,  food,  water,  health  care,  and  loss  of  social networks.18  Such was the case in the story  of the Standing Rock Sioux, who experienced dramatic displacement as a result of the dam system created by the Pick-Sloan Act, which as the Dakota Access Pipeline controversy demonstrates, still has ramifications to this day. In some cases, displacement was irreparably calamitous, such as the O’Shaughnessy Dam, which created the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir  in  Yosemite  Valley  in  1923.  Already  severely  disrupted  by  the formation of the national park  and the California genocide, the Ahwaneechee Miwok along with other regional tribal groups lost villages, food sources, sacred sites, and the center of their spiritual world.19  In the 1930s, as a result of the Bonneville, and later the John Day, and the Dalles dams, dozens of Nez Perce, Umatilla, Yakama, and Warm Springs families were relocated from at least three villages on the Columbia River with promises of new housing to replace those lost  in the  flooding—promises  that  as  late  as  2013  were  not  kept  for  some families.20   In  New  York,  six  hundred  residents  of  the  Seneca  Nation  were forcibly relocated to make room for the building of the Kinzua Dam in 1965.
Displacement   was   not   the   only   way   that   dams   disrupted   Indigenous communities   environmentally.   Waters   were   diverted,   interrupting   farming practices; ancient food sources were eliminated; tribal self-determination was compromised with dams built on treaty lands; entire ecosystems were altered, interrupting  cultural  practices  and  dividing  families;  trauma  inflicted  by  the disruptions contributed to failing health conditions in tribal communities. Some of  the  largest  and most  damaging  dams  were  built  during  the  Public  Works Administration,  a  New  Deal  program  to  combat  poverty  during  the  Great Depression, but at the expense of traditional Native lifeways and economies. In general, most of the dams that affect American Indians were built in the first half of the twentieth century, while the second half ushered in a movement to remove some of them. All told, the dam-building era represents one seldom-mentioned aspect of the US cultural genocide against Indigenous peoples.
Examples  of  tribal  communities  who were  hardest  hit  still  linger.  Perhaps nowhere were dams more destructive to Native lives and the ecosystems that

supported them than in the Columbia River basin. More than sixty dams shape a profoundly  remade landscape designed to serve human “progress” within the 1,214-mile-long Columbia River watershed, in what has been called an “organic machine.”21 From British Columbia in the north to northern Nevada in the south, Idaho and parts of Wyoming in the east, and Coast Salish territory to the west, the Columbia and her numerous tributaries have been put to work to advance postindustrial American capitalism, simultaneously  drowning  fisheries tens of thousands  of  years  old and interrupting  migrating  salmon populations  to the point of near extinction. In this massive region there is no tribal nation that has not   suffered   devastating   cultural   impacts   from   the   extensive   damming, contributing   to  ongoing   intergenerational  trauma  of  the  Columbia’s  river people.22  On the  Columbia  Plateau ancient  cultures  connected to each other through a vast system of canoe- and later horse-based transportation. They were the last Indigenous people to be contacted by Europeans within the continental US. This meant that as long as they had their fisheries their cultures remained largely  intact, even after colonization and the ceding  of large swaths of land through the imposition of treaties, like the Yakama Treaty of 1855. The sudden loss of salmon-based economies and spiritual traditions was a seismic shock to the  cultures  and psyches  of  people  who collectively  call  themselves  Salmon People. But because the history  of the Columbia Plateau is one of the least-studied regions of the US, narratives of the “genius” of human innovation and technology in the region still dominate, and ancient Indigenous regional history continues as a footnote in mainstream historic narratives.
Also noteworthy, the Coolidge Dam in Arizona contributed to water diversion problems that for a century impinged the farming abilities of the Maricopa Pima people, leading to starvation and, generations later, contributing to a dramatic diabetes epidemic. A series of dams on the Klamath River in Northern California has  resulted  in  the  near  extinction  of  salmon  runs,  severely  interrupting  the fishing-based traditions  of  the  Yurok,  Karuk,  Winnemum  Wintu,  Shasta,  and other  nations.  And  two  early  twentieth-century  dams,  the  Elwha  and  Glines Canyon, permanently altered the watershed and blocked salmon and steelhead runs of the Klallam people, who since time immemorial lived along the Elwha River in Washington State, and flooded the nation’s spiritual center.23


ENERGY, EXTRAC TIVISM, AND EC OC IDE
The various eras of US land acquisition through treaty making (and other Indian land grabs) produced a noticeable pattern long recognized in Indian country: that the best lands were often those ceded (or taken), and the reserved lands were the

least desired by settlers. The most desirable lands were those perceived to be most productive and suitable for farming or grazing. Prior to the early twentieth century, land acquisition occurred before particular resources had been found or recognized to be valuable. With the twentieth century came new technologies, increased need for energy, and discoveries of substances on Indian lands that would be coveted by  extractive industries. The most notable of these are oil, coal, and uranium. Found in some of the most desolate regions in the country on lands that belong to some of the most desperately  poor people in the United States, these substances brought promises of poverty relief and a better future for upcoming generations. And they did, in sometimes dramatic ways, but far less often   they   did   not.   Also   unknown   were   the   devastating   environmental consequences that mining  or drilling  for these substances would bring  to the nations, or the ways they would be swindled in shady business deals, or even murdered  for  their  wealth.  This  latter  point  became  obvious  in  the  early twentieth century in an episode of history that was little-known but notoriously referred to as the Osage Reign of Terror.
After  being  pushed  out  of  their  homelands  in  what  is  today  Missouri, Arkansas, and Oklahoma in the early nineteenth century to what became Kansas, the Osage people were forced to move again in 1871 to a remote corner of northeast  Oklahoma,  where  oil  was  discovered  on  their  new  reservation. Beginning around 1895, the Osage oil boom had produced so much black gold and gas that by the roaring 1920s, the two-thousand-member Osage nation had become the wealthiest people per capita in the world, drawing millions of dollars in oil royalties. Their new wealth brought all the opulence one would expect— mansions, brand-new cars, servants. They sent their children to the best schools and  traveled  to  Europe,  and  across  the  country  their  fortune  was  a  news sensation. Dusty cow towns like Pawhuska were transformed into thriving cities, and businesses flourished as the proverbial American dream appeared to come true for the Osages and those around them. But where such fantastic wealth is found, so is corruption and treachery of the most heinous kind, and by 1925 the Osage  dream  had become  one  of  the  worst  nightmares  in American history. What followed was a string of gruesome murders between 1921 and 1925 that left dozens of people dead, mostly Osage—and in one case an entire family—in a vast conspiracy carried out by multiple white men in order to gain access to Indian lands and inherit Osage oil wealth through calculated intermarriage.
Contributing to the formation of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the early twentieth century, the Osage Reign of Terror to this day has lingered as a sordid tale of unsolved murders and unanswered questions. And though it’s a relatively   unknown   chapter   of   American   history,   it’s   been   the   topic   of

Hollywood  films  and  numerous  books,  including  the  2017  New  York  Times bestseller Killers of the Flower Moon: The Osage Murders and the Birth of the FBI, by  Daniel Grann. Examining  new evidence, Grann concluded that there were at least sixty deaths, many of which went uninvestigated, and that the entire town  of  Pawhuska  was  complicit  in  one  way  or  another  in  the  deaths  and corruption that resulted in the skimming and scamming of Osage money.24
But  sadly,  the  Osage  murders  represent  only  the  beginning  of  the  deadly avarice  that  would  accompany  resource  extraction  in  Indian  country.  In  the following decade, scientists in Berkeley, California, were hard at work learning how to split the atom. By  1945 the Manhattan Project had given birth to the world’s  first  atomic  bomb,  and  with  it  the  nuclear  weapons  industry.  The uranium it took  to create those first-generation weapons came predominantly from the lands of the Navajo Nation, at a cost that Navajo and other Native peoples are still paying in human and nonhuman life today.
The  story  of  the  Navajo  experience  with  uranium  mining  is  notorious. Feminist scholar Tracy Voyles refers to “wastelanding” (in a book by the same name),  a  process  where  particular  lands  and  particular  bodies—in  this  case desert “wastelands” and Indigenous Navajo bodies—are deemed pollutable.25 In the settler colonial context where the irreducible objective is attaining Native territory  and  resources,  these  bodies  and  lands  are  sacrificial  and  inevitably expendable because they are viewed and treated as worthless. And nowhere is this more apparent than the Four Corners region of the American Southwest. The Colorado Plateau, where most of the United States’ uranium deposits lie, is the home of the Navajo Nation and Pueblo peoples. Uranium mining was predated by the mining of vanadium for the new car-manufacturing industry at the turn of the  century;  uranium  was  a  by-product  of  vanadium  extraction,  and  while uranium  had  limited  industrial  uses,  with  the  discovery  of  its  radioactive properties  in  1917  the  stage  was  set  for  the  United  States’ soon-to-be  born nuclear weapons program.
With roughly half the United States’ recoverable uranium in New Mexico and half of that within the borders of the Navajo Nation, the Kerr-McGee Company in 1948  set  up mining  operations  with a  readymade  workforce  of  under-  or unemployed   Southwest   Indigenous   peoples,   predominantly   Navajo.26	The business-friendly environment was ideal for the company, with no taxes, cheap labor, and no health, safety, or pollution regulations. Within minutes of blasting, miners were sent into shallow tunnels without equipment of any kind to protect them from breathing  radioactive dust where they  loaded radioactive ore  into wheelbarrows  as  though it  were  coal.  After  approximately  a  half  century  of

uranium  mining  on  the  Navajo  reservation,  all  the  expended  mines  were abandoned,  and radioactive  mine  tailings  were  left  exposed to the  elements, becoming airborne and contaminating above and underground water sources and ecosystems. Within a few decades lung-cancer death rates skyrocketed on the reservation, and children suffered radiation burns from playing around the mines or in the water exposed to the waste. Making matters worse, four months after the  Three  Mile  Island  nuclear  plant  meltdown  in  July  1979,  on  the  Navajo reservation  near  Church  Rock,  New  Mexico,  an  earthen  dam  disposal  pool containing  uranium  mine  waste  burst,  releasing  a  toxic  stew  of  ninety-three million gallons of acidic, radioactive tailings and solid radioactive waste into the Rio Puerco River, poisoning the drinking and irrigation water of thousands of Navajo people as far as eighty miles downstream. The Rio Puerco catastrophe is generally thought of as the worst radiation spill in American history, even though it received nowhere near the attention of Three Mile Island.
The same year, the US Senate held hearings on the history of uranium mining in  New  Mexico,  probing  the  Navajo  cancer  epidemic.  It  condemned  Kerr-McGee’s  lack  of  safety  protocols  as  deliberate  negligence,  in  light  of  the knowledge  that  by  1930  radioactivity  in  uranium  mines  was  linked  to  lung cancer. Further, although scientific evidence connecting radon gas to radiation-related  illness  existed  after  1949,  the  company  still  did  nothing  to  properly ventilate the mines as they stepped up their mining operations. Even worse, the Public Health Service monitored the health of more than four thousand miners between  1954  and  1960  without  ever  informing  them  of  the  threat  to  their health.27  In 1990 Congress passed the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act (RECA), targeting  a compassionate payment program to former miners, their widows, and other “downwinders” for their pain and suffering, but a tangle of bureaucratic roadblocks made compensation functionally unattainable to most of the victims of radiogenic disease, and RECA was expanded in 2000. As of 2015, awards   to   Native   Americans   totaled   approximately   $264   million   among seventeen tribes. Members of the Navajo Nation alone received at least $212 million based on 2,800 claims.28
In 2005 the Navajo Nation took a stand against uranium mining by passing the Diné Natural Resources Protection Act, prohibiting its mining and processing on the reservation. But the vestiges of uranium mining  on the Navajo Nation is ongoing with upward of two thousand abandoned mines that remain, which are still  contaminating  Navajo  lands  and  waters,  and  with  widespread  health problems related to uranium contamination.29 A lawsuit against Kerr-McGee and its parent company, Anadarko Petroleum, for its legacy of industrial pollution

across the US was settled in 2014 for $5.15 billion, with $1 billion earmarked for cleanup on the Navajo Nation. That amount, however, will clean up only forty-nine mines, leaving the rest untouched.
The cases of the Osage murders and Navajo uranium mining are only two of the most obvious examples of how twentieth-century postindustrial expansion has  delivered  an  excruciatingly  mixed  bag  of  economic  benefits  and  fatal consequences  to  Indian  country,  especially  when  accompanied  by  a  lack  of disclosure of the impacts of industrial mineral extraction or equal partnership with  Native  governments.  Many  more  can  be  named,  like  the  decades-long Peabody   Coal  battle  at  Big   Mountain–Black   Mesa,  which  not  only   had devastating ecological impacts but also pitted Navajo and Hopi people against each other after centuries of peaceful coexistence. The manufactured conflict between  the  Hopi  and  Navajo  peoples  resulted  in  the  forced  removal  of thousands  of  Navajos,  a  court-acknowledged  violation  of  their  human  and environmental rights (aided by Interior Department corruption and congressional collusion),   desecrated   sacred   sites,   and   the   substantial   depletion   of   an underground desert aquifer. The environmental threats of coal mining are also felt on the Northern Cheyenne reservation in Montana, which is surrounded by massive coal deposits and where the largest coal strip mine in the United States —aptly named Colstrip—and four coal-fired power plants are situated adjacent to the reservation border. Electricity generation from the plants produces such bad  air  quality  that  it  causes  respiratory  diseases  and  low  birthrates.30   The Northern Cheyenne have battled the coal industry for decades to protect their otherwise pristine environment. In April 2017 the latest insult came when the Trump administration moved to lift a coal mining moratorium on public lands without consulting the tribe, which violated federal regulations and triggered one lawsuit  by  the  tribe  and  another  by  a  coalition  of  conservation  and  citizen groups.31
On the Spokane Indian Reservation in Washington State, high cancer rates still  haunt  the  community,  with  the  remains  of  two  Cold  War–era  open-pit uranium mines, the Sherwood and Midnight Mines, scarring the landscape and continuing  to  poison  the  people.  Peripherally  related,  the  Hanford  Nuclear Reservation in Washington, which processed uranium for the nuclear weapons industry   from  1943  until  its  decommissioning  in  1987,  contaminated  the Columbia River with routine dumping of radioactive materials directly into the river or onto the ground. Elevated rates of cancer and rare birth defects still plague  the  Yakama  reservation  and  surrounding  communities.32   Efforts  to conduct   serious   studies   on   the   effects   of   Hanford’s   contamination   have

consistently been thwarted, especially by government entities. Uranium mining also took  its toll in the Great Plains on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota. A uranium mine spill in 1962 in Edgemont, South Dakota, dumped radioactive  waste  into  the  Cheyenne  River,  contaminating  the  reservation’s underground water source at Red Shirt Table, but had gone undetected for years. Not until 1980 did the Indian Health Service test the water after 38 percent of the pregnant women at Pine Ridge miscarried in the fifth month. In addition, of the children who were born, 60 to 70 percent exhibited birth defects ranging from undeveloped lungs to cleft palate and club foot.33 More than one thousand open-pit mines dot the four-state region of North and South Dakota, Wyoming, and Montana, including the Lakota sacred lands of the Black  Hills. On the Wind River  reservation in Wyoming,  home  to the  Eastern Shoshone  and Northern Arapaho, uranium mining and processing at the Susquehanna-Western uranium mill tailings site left a legacy of increased incidents of cancer.34
In  2014,  Indian  Country  Today  reported  that  of  the  United  States’ 1,322 Superfund sites, 532 of them were located on Indian lands—an astoundingly disproportionate figure considering how little of the US land base is Indian trust land. Superfund sites are designated under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) of 1980. These sites are not just uranium or coal mines either. Some Superfund sites, like the General Motors and the Alcoa aluminum facilities, both in Massena, New York, adjacent to the Saint Regis Mohawk  Reservation, were polluted due to manufacturing processes that leached PCBs and other hazardous substances into local water sources and ecosystems. Of the toxic sites the Indian Country Today story listed, however, the majority were the result of extractive industries. Some were well known, like the Midnight Mine in Washington. Others less so, like Salt Chuck Mine in southeast Alaska on the traditional lands of the Organized Village of Kasaan, which operated as a copper, palladium, gold, and silver mine from 1916 to 1941. Or the Sulfur Bank Mercury Mine, which is now the home of the Elem Band of Pomo Indians in Northern California, where mercury poisons people’s bodies and contaminated nearby Clearlake—a traditional source of fish for the tribe—making it the most mercury-polluted lake in the world. Or the abandoned Rio Tinto Copper Mine site in Nevada near the lands of the Shoshone Paiute Tribes of Duck Valley, where the mine operated from 1932 to 1976 and whose mill  tailings  made  Mill  Creek  uninhabitable  for  redband  trout,  an  important cultural food source.35
The extensive environmental devastation as described above is often referred to as “ecocide.” “Ecocide” was first named in international legal circles in the

early 1970s to describe the destruction of ecosystems, implicating the behavior of governments and corporations all over the world—particularly in Indigenous and other marginalized communities—and has been applied in the American Indian context.36  A decades-long  effort to include ecocide alongside the four crimes against peace of the ICC’s Rome Statute (the four being genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and crimes of aggression) succeeded, but the revised statute limits ecocide to a crime only during wartime. Ecocide is part of the burgeoning field of “green criminology,” a branch of criminology  studies that links ecosystem destruction with corporate crime and environmental justice, seeing  the  environment  as  an  independent  entity  invested  with  rights.  But another strand of green criminology research sheds light on the underexamined connections  between  ecocide  and  genocide,  recognizing  the  human  rights implications when ecocide interferes with a culture’s ability to perpetuate itself. By understanding the nexus of ecocide and cultural genocide, these researchers aim  to  ultimately  produce  new  international  laws  that  prevent  the  ongoing destruction of cultures due to extreme energy development technology such as fracking, or what British genocide scholar Damien Short calls “bottom of the barrel” development.37


FOSSIL FUEL EXTRAC TION: INDIAN C OUNTRY ’S FAUSTIAN BARGAIN?
It’s one thing when Indigenous communities are placed in harm’s way or their lands are destroyed by extractive industries without being fully informed about the risks or having given their informed consent to extractive projects that will affect them. The robbing of Indigenous agency by State governments is, after all, the  hallmark  of  hegemonic  colonial  relationships.  But  things  get  ethically complicated  when  Native  nation  governments  willingly  choose  to  engage  in resource extraction—especially fossil fuels—given the environmental harm they cause,  both  in  the  extracting   and  in  the  production  of  climate-changing greenhouse gases. The need to escape poverty and assert sovereignty, weighed against cultural obligations to protect land, forces tribes into what can seem like an impossible double bind. It is a realm of difficult choices that exists beyond binaries of black and white and right and wrong, necessitated by the unforgiving and unrelenting demands of capitalism.
Most  of  the  cases  discussed  above  occurred  during  periods  of  oppressive federal Indian policy, before any meaningful articulations of tribal sovereignty had been built into federal regulatory regimes. But by the late 1950s things had begun to change, with tribes able to establish their rights of resource ownership

and   consent   authority,   enabling	them   to   negotiate   with   multinational corporations for leases and royalties.38 A turning point occurred in 1975 with the passage   of   the   Indian  Self-Determination  and  Education  Assistance   Act, ushering in a new framework that would stress the government to government relationship, the United States’ trust responsibility, and tribal sovereignty. This new era signaled a loosening of the federal reins on Indian country, largely to promote economic self-sufficiency, which could be accomplished in a number of ways  including  by  greater  resource  extraction.  Armed  with  their  enhanced powers of self-government and the need to combat the intractable poverty that gripped their  communities,  some  tribal  governments  in resource-rich regions have chosen this route.
Some have fared quite well, like the Southern Utes in Colorado, who have built a financial empire based on natural gas production, which in 2005 was worth $650 million.39 Similarly, the Three Affiliated Tribes of the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation was already doing well for itself by leasing its lands for oil and gas development in the North Dakota Bakken oil fields. In 2015 the tribe formed its own oil drilling  company  to gain greater control over production, increasing its profits and improving living conditions on the reservation. But in addition to the issue of the greenhouse gases produced by fossil fuels, both the Southern Utes and Three Affiliated use fracking  technology  to access  shale-embedded gas and oil. Fracking  is highly  controversial for its environmental impacts,  including  the  polluting  and  depletion  of  ground  and  surface  water, inducing   seismic   activity,   and   radon   and   methane   gas   emissions.   And paradoxically, in the case of Three Affiliated, their Bakken field–produced oil flows through the Dakota Access Pipeline that the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe fought  so hard to stop and gave  birth to workers’ “man camps,”  which has resulted in increasing rates of violent crimes against Native women.
Whatever shade of gray Native energy development falls into and the ethical challenges it may pose, tribal nations have the undisputed right to develop their lands in whatever ways they like (always under the supervision of federal law, that is). Still, the relationship between nation building and extractive land use is a  conundrum that exposes  profound contradictions,  considering  the  very  real cultural values that view the Earth as a living relative to be honored, not harmed —especially now with the looming specter of irreversible climate change. This worldview is consistent across all Native nations and is encoded in the cultural fabric of Indigenous societies through their origin stories, often referred to as “original instructions.” As author and Native studies scholar Melissa K. Nelson writes, “They are natural laws that, when ignored, have natural consequences.”

40 The original instructions are roadmaps for right relationship between humans and between humans and their nonhuman relatives.
This is the message of a growing number of Indigenous activists working to raise  awareness  so  that  tribes  can  transcend  the  seduction  of  fossil  fuel extraction. Clayton Thomas-Muller, a member of Mathias Colomb Cree Nation (Canada) and an activist with Indigenous Environmental Network, wrote in 2008 of his work to educate tribal nations about the dangers of extractive industries, especially  oil.41  Calling  it  energy  colonization,  Thomas-Muller  likens  energy companies   to   proselytizing   Jesuit   missionaries   who   targeted   Indigenous communities  knowing  that  their  poverty  made  them  vulnerable  to  tempting promises of a better way  of life. Yet, worldwide Indigenous communities are disproportionately affected by the “river of destruction,” as Thomas-Muller puts it,  from  the  extraction  process  to refining  to  the  burning  of  oil  in  cars  and airplanes. Every aspect of oil production from beginning to end is toxic and has long-ranging impacts to the environment and human health. Yaqui legal scholar Rebecca Tsosie points out that Indigenous nations need to measure short-term benefits   against   long-term   harms   with   their   energy   projects,   especially considering that in the big picture, it is the global south that will suffer the worst consequences of climate change. Because of the political power of the US and its global  position,  she  argues,  some  tribal  nations  will  be  “climate  change winners.” 42 The Navajo Nation, for example, would benefit from the proposed Desert Rock coal-fired power plant in jobs and revenue generation from leases and taxes, but shouldn’t they care about others who will be the climate change losers, Tsosie asks, like Arctic peoples and other Indigenous peoples who will be disproportionately affected?43  For the Navajo, the answers can be found in the Fundamental Law, a set of guiding principles based on the instructions of the Holy People at the time of creation and woven into the Navajo Nation governing system. It offers an ethical framework  that stresses the interrelatedness of all living things and the maintenance of right relationship.44
Tsosie’s point is that sovereignty functions on two levels: governmental and cultural. The activism of grassroots people can function as a check and balance on  tribal  governments  who  might  otherwise  make  choices  based  purely  on economic self-interest, not long-term environmental health and spiritual balance, as was the case in the defeat of the Desert Rock power plant.45 At the same time, Native people must be vigilant not to see themselves through the reductive lens of stereotypes that are imposed on them by  outsiders, and not fall victim to beliefs   that   tribal   economic   development   and   cultural   preservation   and responsibility are mutually exclusive. By adhering to their original instructions,

Native  nations  “may  be  the  only  governmental  entities  that  can  bring  these multiple   aspects   of   development   into  the   ethical   calculation  of   what   is appropriate energy policy for the twenty-first century.” 46
As this chapter has shown, the relationship between industrialism, resource extraction,   and  infrastructure   development   exposes   the   collusion  between corporate interests and government that has been a core process of the US settler State.  It  was  propelled  by   western  expansion  and  imperialism,  based  on ideologies of racial, cultural, and religious superiority  of European American settlers.  The  technological  innovations  and  Indian  land  cessions  that  made westward movement possible have always benefitted settler populations at the expense of Indigenous populations. When viewed through the lens of the Dakota Access Pipeline conflict, we can see that the hasty granting of permits to Energy Transfer Partners without a full environmental impact statement or proper tribal consultation was business as usual in the grand scheme of history. At the same time, that the pipeline conveys Bakken oil derived at least in part from Indian lands on the Fort Berthold reservation reveals the tension between the tribal exploitation of resources, on one hand, and Indigenous imperatives to care for other-than-human life, on the other. And as the artwork of Bunky Echo-Hawk so poignantly  reminds  us,  modernity’s  challenge  to  Native  governments  is  to balance the material needs of the nation with the original instructions of the Creator within a governing structure that forces choices between resource-based and relationship-based management.
The effect of this system is not only continual political tightrope walking and environmental compromise. Environmental disruption from land dispossession and imposed infrastructure development has also netted very real harm to the physical health of Native people, as we turn to in the next chapter.




C H A P T E R    F O U R




Food Is Medicine, Water Is Life American Indian Health and the Environment

Our traditional foods are a pillar of our culture, and they feed much more than our physical bodies; they feed our spirits.

—VALERIE SEGREST, MUCKLESHOOT TRIBAL MEMBER, 2013

The mixed terrain of verdant mountain forests and dry, open steppe plains of the Upper Columbia River basin near what is today the Colville Indian Reservation was a land rich in food sources that produced some of the healthiest people on the  North  American  continent  prior  to  European  invasion.  Plants  such  as bitterroot,  hazelnuts,  soap  berries,  chokecherries,  and  numerous  varieties  of camas bulbs combined with protein sources like deer, elk, and other smaller game  to  form  a  balanced  and  highly  nutritious  diet.  The  imposition  of  the reservation system disrupted our ancestors’ access to these original foods, which were gradually replaced with the high-starch, high-fat foods characteristic of the European  diet.  At  the  center  of  Colville  food  traditions  was  salmon.  For millennia, my Sinixt ancestors thrived, as had all the nations of the Columbia River,  on a  food source  as  sacred to the  people  of  the  mighty  Columbia  as buffalo was to the people of the Plains. Salmon fishing  in this region of the plateau revolved around a place known in English as Kettle Falls—Swah-netk-qhu to the Indians1—a massive fishery that had sustained plateau people until the Grand Coulee Dam submerged the falls in the early 1940s, simultaneously ripping  out  the  heart  of  Colville  culture.  The  dam  obliterated  the  abundant salmon runs, delivering a final blow to our traditional diets and collective health. Today,   Colvilles   suffer   disproportionately   high   rates   of   diabetes,   cancer, tuberculosis, heart disease, and a host of other health conditions related to poor diet  and  lack  of  good  medical  care.  On  average,  American  Indians  still  die younger  than non-Natives,  and a  startling  2008 Department  of  Health report found that American Indian babies died at a rate 44 percent greater than a decade previously.2  The  reasons  for  our  health  disparities  stem  from  the  history  of

colonialization and are exacerbated by federal neglect.3
The harsh reality of Colville people’s health issues is that they are typical of Indian country more broadly and a direct result of disruptions to Native peoples’ traditional food systems. According to the Indian Health Service (IHS), between 2008 and 2010, American Indians died at a rate roughly 30 percent higher than non-Indians,  from  a  range  of  causes.4   Among  those  causes  (which  include accidents,  suicide,  violence,  and  other  illnesses)  what  stands  out  relative  to nutritionally related diseases is the rate of death from diabetes, which is three times  the  national  average.  It  is  ironic  but  perhaps  not  surprising  that  IHS attributes   American   Indian   health   disparities   to   “inadequate   education, disproportionate poverty, discrimination in the delivery of health services, and cultural differences. These are broad quality of life issues rooted in economic adversity  and  poor  social  conditions.”5   While  IHS  does  acknowledge  the problem  of  inadequate  funding  and  makes  vague  references  to  structural inequality,   nowhere   is   the   United   States’  history   of   violence   and   land dispossession implicated as the source of these health problems. According to one 2014 IHS report that claims the diabetes epidemic is slowing, 15.9 percent of Alaska Natives and American Indians have diabetes, compared to an overall national rate of 11.7 percent.6  The problem, however, is worse in some groups than others. For example, a 2014 study  by  the Navajo Nation’s Diné Policy Institute found a rise in diabetes in the Navajo population that went from 22 percent in 1990 to 33 percent in 2014. It elaborated:

Indian  Health  Service  now  estimates  that  1  in  3  Navajos  are  either diagnosed with type-2 diabetes or are pre-diabetic. This equates to nearly 100,000 Navajos or approximately 33% of the Navajo population. As the incidence of diabetes is more heavily concentrated within the boundaries of Navajo Nation, the rate of diabetes may be closer to 50% for the population of the Navajo Nation; IHS workers have anecdotally stated that they are diagnosing diabetes for 1 in 2 patients in some regions.7

Diabetes is a clear and present danger and at the forefront of discussions about health  problems  in  Indian  country,  but  it  provides  only  one  window  into  a multiplicity of health problems related to Indigenous environmental disruption and modern uses of land. We have seen how the legacy of uranium mining and nuclear waste still affects Native communities on the Colorado Plateau and in other places. And another study in 2017 revealed that continual exposure to low-level inorganic arsenic in well water is linked to impaired neuropsychological

functioning in American Indian elders throughout the western United States.8 Clint Carroll, one of the authors of the study, contends that it is also a direct threat to culture, since it is elders who carry so much of the cultural knowledge of a nation; neuropsychological functioning raises concerns, he says, about the transmission of that knowledge to future generations.9
If  we  understand  settler  colonialism  as  a  genocidal  structure,  the  health disparities   (and   virtually   all   the   negative   sociopolitical   indicators   that characterize  the  American  Indian  demographic10)  can  clearly  be  linked  as elements  of  environmental  injustice.  All  over  the  world  food  is  a  defining characteristic  of  cultures,  and  for  Native  people  whose  roots  have  been established in particular geographical regions for thousands of years, physical bodies became adapted to those places from where their food derives. Food is the  conduit  between  people  and  place  that  ensures  cultural  longevity  and personal physical vitality. When those food sources are disrupted, health and culture are disrupted, triggering a cascade of sociological repercussions. Turning once again to the work of Michigan State University’s Kyle Powys Whyte, it’s a pattern,  he  says,  that  is  reflected  in  Indigenous  peoples’  relationships  with settler-industrial  States  worldwide.  Adding  another  layer  of  specificity  to an analysis  of  settler  colonialism,  settler  industrialism  refers  to the  ways  settler societies  inscribe  themselves  on  top  of  Indigenous  homelands  by  means  of industrial processes, “from military technologies to large-scale mineral and fossil fuel  extraction  operations  to  sweeping   landscape-transforming   regimes  of commodity  agriculture.”11   He  describes  the  disruption  of  Indigenous  food systems  as  interference  in  Indigenous  peoples’  collective  capacity  to  self-determine  how  they  adapt  to  “metascale  forces”  like  climate  change  and economic transitions, forces not of their making and beyond their control but which they were swept into. According to Whyte, colonization is one such force that affected every aspect of Native life including their food systems, which he contends are really  ecological systems. Given the place-based nature of their existence, Indigenous cultures are often described as holistic, and a disruption to one aspect of community life has reverberations into all other aspects of it; thus, the  disruptions  to  Indigenous  food  systems  are  part  of  the  environmental disruption that defines settler colonization. This also includes medicinal plants and  other  resources,  a  topic  this  chapter  will  also  discuss.  But  first,  let  us consider these topics within a historical context.


PREC ONTAC T LIFEWAY S AND C OLONIAL IMPAC TS ON DIET AND HEALTH

Studies about the food patterns of Indigenous peoples confirm the robustness of pre-Columbian peoples’ health. At the time of first contact, Native peoples in North America were using around two thousand types of plant-based foods, and it  was  this  nutritional  diversity  that  ensured  physical  vitality.  Native  North Americans were among the healthiest in the world (notwithstanding the imported diseases brought by the Europeans responsible for massive depopulation in the first centuries of contact12) well into the modern era, before the advent of the modern American diet.13 Such was not the case in Europe, where nutrition- and vitamin- deficiency-related diseases were commonplace. Dental health studies of Indigenous peoples worldwide, for example, confirm that the extreme change in diets is responsible for the chronic health issues and degenerative diseases that plague Native American communities (and other Indigenous peoples) today.14
Evidence suggests that food cultivation in the Southwest dates as far back as eight to ten thousand years ago, in what has been called the Lakeshore Ecology Phase, when Pueblo peoples began the transition from hunter-gatherer societies to agriculturists.15 After the end of the last ice age as big game became more and more scarce, Native people evolved agricultural practices that rivaled those of the Fertile Crescent in the Middle East, the so-called birthplace of civilization. It was  not  just  the  type  of  food  that  sustained  Native  health,  but  also  their relationship to those foods, which existed on a spiritual continuum of reciprocity that   nourished   their   spirits   as   well.   Food   traditions   evolved   to   become inseparable   from   religious   traditions,   and   sacred   foods   were   perhaps unsurprisingly  also their  most  nutritious  foods,  especially  corn.16  Corn  is  so important to the Pueblo people that their origin stories are constructed around it. Corn,  beans,  and  squash  were  known  affectionately  by  the  Haudenosaunee people (also known as the Iroquois Confederacy) as the Three Sisters. As was true in Pueblo societies, the Haudenosaunee viewed their world as a network of intertwined relationships of which they were only a part, not the center. In this relationship, respect for their plant relatives and their environments ensured their health as well as the health of the people. Not only was the nutritional value of these sacred foods known to them but their farming techniques also ensured the future viability  of the ground where they  grew. The same was true with the Pueblo dryland farming techniques, which produced abundant harvests in one of the most arid regions of the continent. In a place where drought was common, the success of Pueblo farmers’ gardens “was accomplished through the use of multiple, strategically placed garden plots and the construction of many check dams and terraced plots.”17  They worked ingeniously within the constraints of their environmental limitations in ways that sustained them for millennia. In

other  words,  it  was  the  symbiotic  relationship with place  and their  sense  of responsibility to those places that guaranteed the health of the people.
In the Pacific Northwest on the Enumclaw Plateau in Washington State, where large-scale farming similar to the Pueblo and Haudenosaunee was unnecessary, Lushootseed people (today’s Muckleshoot and their relatives the Puyallup and Duwamish and others on the coast) survived on the abundance provided by the ocean, rivers, and forest and mountain plains. Prior to colonization, their high-protein diet was derived from fish, shellfish, small and large wild game, and, most important, salmon. Twenty to thirty percent of their caloric intake was plant based,  derived from camas,  chocolate  lily,  mustard,  nettles,  balsamroot,  wild onion, and dozens of other plants, edible roots, nuts, and berries. But they also practiced a form of food cultivation that nurtured the growth of their wild root crops in estuaries, supplementing their diets when salmon runs and other food sources were less bountiful.18  Camas bulbs are high in protein, fiber, calcium, iron,   and   inulin,   while   balsamroot   contains   antifungal   and   antibacterial properties, and both can be eaten in many different ways. Like the Pueblo and Haudenosaunee peoples’ relationship to corn, Northwest people consider their traditional  foods  to  be  sacred,  and  they  are  deeply  intertwined  in  religious traditions in ceremonies widely known as the potlatch. Potlatch ceremonies, held in  longhouses  that  served  as  the  hub  for  communities,  were  gatherings  that celebrated the sharing of wealth by the more affluent in society with the less affluent. Central to the potlatch celebrations was feasting, which brought people together  in  extensive  food  gathering  and  preparation  activities.  For  Pacific Northwest peoples, as for peoples all over the world, food is central to culture.
With  American  domination  and  the  influx  of  foreigners  to  Lushootseed territory came the loss of access to traditional foods and the poisoning of the environment where those foods historically grew. Even in areas where traditional foods still grow, the ecological systems are often so polluted and toxic that those foods are rendered inedible. Invasive plant species also choke out indigenous species. The Muckleshoot situation is not unique; all over North America this story  plays  out  in  Indigenous  communities  in  one  form  or  another.  North America is known to be one of the most biodiverse land masses on the planet. According to the Cultural Conservancy’s Melissa Nelson (Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians), as many as four thousand food varieties and species are unique to the continent, but one-third of them are ecologically or culturally at risk  of  extinction  or  abandonment.  As  she  notes,  “Biological  diversity  and cultural diversity  go hand in hand. When one becomes endangered the other becomes endangered,”19 and this is reflected in the declining health of American

Indian people.


OTHER THREATS TO TRADITIONAL FOODS AND MEDIC INES
There is no Indigenous group in the US whose relationships to ancestral foods has not been severely impacted, if not completely disrupted. Some of these are well known, having been extensively documented, and no one has written more powerfully  or  prolifically  on the  issue  than Winona  LaDuke.  LaDuke  is  the quintessential  Indigenous  eco-warrior,  making  her  mark  in larger  Indigenous environmental justice conversation not only as a researcher but also as an activist who  has  worked  tirelessly  for  decades  in  her  own  White  Earth  reservation community to protect Ojibwe access to wild rice, known to them as manoomin. For as long as the Ojibwe (also known as Anishinaabeg) have resided in the woodlands of the Great Lakes region in today’s Minnesota, they have relied on manoomin as a primary food source. Not surprising, their ancient origin stories reference it. Long ago it was prophesied that when the people found the “food that grows on the water” it would end their westward migration, from the land of their Wampanoag, Lenape, and Abenaki relatives, and it was the Ojibwe cultural hero Nanaboozhoo who would find it and bring it to them.20  With colonization came a declining dependence on manoomin, but at the same time, in the modern era, ricing became an important economic resource. Recognizing its potential as a unique cash crop, the state of Minnesota domesticated wild rice, opening it up to commercial production under the misleading term “Indian wild rice” as far away as California (where no rice grows wild). Unleashing the triple evils of cultural appropriation, genetic modification, and patent ownership propagated by conglomerates like DuPont, Monsanto, Syngenta, and a host of others has not only resulted in truth-in-advertising legal battles but also exposed manoomin to the   possibility   of   transgenic   contamination.21	The   mixing   of   genetically engineered   rice   organisms—which   are   bred   to   not   produce   seeds—with manoomin could render the true wild varieties sterile, irreversibly upsetting the balance of the Ojibwe’s relationship to wild rice and its ecosystem—a possibility the Ojibwe are unwilling to accept.22 Further, the Ojibwe consider granting gene patents to corporations an act of “biopiracy” based on the belief that no one should possess rights of ownership to what was given by the Creator as a gift to the  people.23   Patents  constitute  the  interference  of  the  Ojibwe’s  reciprocal relationship with manoomin, but some argue that it also potentially violates the Ojibwe’s treaty rights.24
Another high-profile issue LaDuke has written about is the disruption of the

Klamath nation’s relationship with salmon and sucker fish. The Klamath people have been sustained by their relationship with the Klamath River for thousands of years, but as is true for many river-dwelling peoples, changes to the physical environment combined with political intrusions have severely interrupted access to their most sacred food sources. In Indian country the Klamath are most well known for the termination of their tribal status by the Bureau of Indian Affairs in 1954 and the devastating loss of their reservation in Oregon with its rich timber resources that supported the tribe economically. The termination of their tribal status  translated  into  a  decline  in  every  socioeconomic  indicator  possible, including health.25 While their federal recognition was restored in 1986, only a small  fraction of  their  land was  returned.  But  decades  of  dam  building  and agriculture left the Klamath River an ecological disaster, leading  not only  to massive salmon and sucker fish depopulation but also to an intense culture war between   Klamath   tribal   members   and   the   settler   population   over   water allocation. At issue was how to draw enough water for farm irrigation and still maintain  healthy   river  flows  for  fish  populations.  Finally,  after  years  of community bridge building and negotiations, a series of agreements were signed between multiple stakeholders, including the Klamath tribe, to simultaneously restore the river’s health and allocate water for irrigation.26
Countless other stories can be told about the disruption to rivers and other ecosystems  and  the  foods  they  produce,  and  their  relationships  with  Native peoples.  In  Maine,  despite  a  legal  victory  in  2016  to  protect  the  Penobscot people’s sustenance fishing rights, consuming fish from the Penobscot River is a health   hazard   due   to   toxic   contamination   of   the   river   and   the   state’s unwillingness to set adequate water quality standards.27  In California, Indians carefully  managed  landscapes  with  controlled  burning  and  other  cultivation techniques to ensure abundant access to hazelnuts, acorns, and numerous other plant and animal species endemic to traditional diets and cultural practices.28 But a  history  of  mission  enslavement,  land  theft,  federal  and  state  government corruption  (and  a  policy  of  extermination),  and  relentless  development  has proven to be the most intractable of obstacles to these resources. In Washington State, decades of radioactive leaks into the Columbia River from the Hanford Nuclear Site have caused disproportionately high rates of cancer and fatal birth defects like anencephaly (a malformation of the brain in which the forebrain and cerebrum fail to form) on the Yakama Reservation, just downriver from the site. And even though Chinook salmon are experiencing a comeback, tribal members don’t trust the health of the fish enough to eat it. Back home on the Colville Reservation, on a one-hundred-fifty-mile stretch of the Columbia River above

the Grand Coulee Dam, the Canadian lead-smelting company Teck Resources dumped dozens of toxic chemicals into the river, including mercury, for nearly a century, toxifying what few salmon and other fish were left and finally triggering a lawsuit in 2004 that the tribe would win in 2012.
When  food  systems  are  interrupted,  the  costs  to  life  and  culture  are incalculable, but we do know that the lingering result of losing legacy foods is the presence of diseases Indian people never used to have. The imposition of the reservation system marks a time of dramatic shift in food patterns, especially in the  west  when Indians  were  forced to adopt  more  sedentary  lives  and were confined  to  the  artificial  boundaries  created  by  treaties.  With  dramatically reduced territories for hunting and fishing, and after buffalo eradication on the Plains, Indians were forced to rely  on government rations consisting of beef, flour, lard, salt, beans, and sometimes sugar and coffee. These food rations were often inadequate or nonexistent when pilfered by corrupt Indian agents, as was all too common in many places. My great-uncle Vern used to tell stories about how on the Colville reservation the distribution of rations pitted families and bands against each when there was not enough to go around, resulting in long-standing resentments generations later.29
These new foods were high in calories and fat and low in fiber and nutritional value, compared to the nutritious and diverse foods Native people had been used to, and led to a state of food insecurity. In the mid-twentieth century, the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) implemented new food programs to combat hunger in American society. With chronic poverty and food insecurity in reservation communities a way of life and recognition that malnutrition was a serious problem as late as 1967, the government also instituted the commodity food program, in addition to the food stamp program, school lunch program, and others. Typical commodity food included canned meats, soups, and juices; pasta; cereal; rice; cheese; peanut butter; corn syrup; flour; dry, evaporated milk; and vegetable oil. In other words, like the rations of earlier days, they were foods high  in  calories  and  low  in  nutritional  content.  Astoundingly,  within  one generation the problem of malnutrition turned into a problem of obesity, what Indian people often refer to as the “commod bod.”30
One theory about the dramatic rise in obesity in American Indian communities suggests  that  the  rapid  shift  away  from  hunting-gathering  lifeways  led  to  a change in metabolism that Indian bodies couldn’t adjust to—the so-called thrifty gene hypothesis. While the thrifty gene hypothesis has never been conclusively proven, lifestyle is nonetheless implicated when more active lives spent hunting and food gathering gave way to more sedentary habits. Combined with systemic

barriers  to  good  quality  food  in  reservation  communities—what  are  often referred  to  as  “food  deserts”—that  is  enough,  researchers  tend  to  argue,  to account for the epidemics in obesity, diabetes, and heart disease. Consequently, programs designed to combat obesity and diabetes focus on prevention through lifestyle  change,  meaning  increased  physical  activity   and  improved  diets, including a return to traditional foods as much as possible.


PLANT MEDIC INES
With  the  loss  of  access  to  traditional  foods  has  come  the  loss  of  access  to traditional  medicinal  plants.  Where  Indigenous  peoples  once  controlled  the entire  continent,  now  only  56.2  million  acres  remain  in  the  jurisdiction  of Indigenous  governments  on reservations  and other  types  of  American Indian communities,   such   as   Rancherias   in   California   and   villages   in   Alaska, constituting only about 1 to 2 percent of the entire US land mass.31 The imposed political and social frameworks that limit access to those spaces (land theft via treaty  abrogation, federal policies of removal and assimilation, federal Indian law that assumes white European superiority, and so on) thus means that original nations’ ability  to  reclaim  their  foods  and  medicines  is  limited  to  a  minute fraction of land.
The  history  of  oppressive  federal  policies  that  dictated  how  Indian  lands should be used still informs the jurisdictional frameworks tribal governments have adopted. Reservations were established during an era that imposed a policy of assimilation based on a philosophy of “appropriate” (white European) land use. As we saw in the previous chapter, Clint Carroll’s work  has shown that resource versus relationship-based land management ultimately has meant using the land for cash-crop farming and other income-generating activities like cattle grazing and timber harvesting, which has been all overseen by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.  Even as  policy  shifted and changed throughout  the  twentieth century, affording greater freedom of choice for tribal governments, for the most part those land practices have remained intact (as has their accountability to the BIA),  becoming  cemented as  depended-upon revenue  streams.  The  problem, however, is that cattle grazing and forestry can be highly destructive to other plant and cultural resources, and that includes medicinal plants.
The  loss  of  medicinal  plant  use  also came  as  a  result  of  the  assimilation process itself, as Native people became increasingly  acculturated to dominant American society and adopted Western medicine. Not all traditional knowledge, however, was completely devalued and abandoned; even when Native religious traditions  (which  invariably   involved  plants)  were  banned  by   the  federal

government, much of the knowledge went underground.32  The knowledge was often held within the purview of specific clans or families, and this included the knowledge of plant medicine. That carefully guarded information is still passed down in families today. American Indian cultural revitalization includes a return to traditional medicine practices, but with current land use practices that result in the loss of medicinal plants, tribes must balance their land management practices to simultaneously meet economic and cultural needs. This can be a source of conflict between heavily bureaucratic tribal governments accountable to the BIA and grassroots community members, given the diametrically opposed mandates to maintain tribal incomes on one hand and maintain sensitive ecosystems for cultural resources on the other.33
The extent of tribal land loss means a loss of jurisdiction over territories that contain important cultural resources like medicinal plants. But it’s especially true in areas of extreme land loss, such as California, where very  little land was retained, and reservations that are heavily checker-boarded.34 In these contexts, maintaining access to cultural resources is ultimately a matter of environmental justice  because  of  the  need  to  engage  with  non-Native  governments  and communities.


WATER
As the example of the Standing Rock Sioux  Tribe’s battle against the Dakota Access Pipeline dramatically revealed, there are few issues more sensitive than water: its availability, quality, accessibility, and even its power to destroy human life and permanently alter the existence of communities. The creation of Lake Oahe   itself   embodies   all   these   complicated   realities,   having   delivered devastating  blows  to  the  lives  of  the  Standing  Rock  people,  with  the  dams imposed  by  the  Pick-Sloane  Act.35   Now,  paradoxically,  in  the  twenty-first century, with extractive industries’ ongoing incursions into Indian country and a changing  climate,  Lake  Oahe  represents  a  lifeline  to Standing  Rock’s  future existence as a community. Water is indeed life, the activists at Sacred Stone and Oceti Sakowin reminded us, and the threat of a pipeline leak underneath that source was too great a risk to idly accept.
The Dakota Access Pipeline was not, however, the first recent threat to water in  Great  Plains  Indian  country.  Barely  five  months  before  the  #NoDAPL movement began in early 2016, coalitions of Native and non-Native people alike successfully prevented the permitting of the Keystone XL Pipeline, a 1,179-mile section that would convey Alberta tar sands oil through Montana, South Dakota,

and Nebraska, connecting it to the southern leg of the pipeline already running from the Southern Plains to the Gulf of Mexico. After a four-year-long campaign that   galvanized   Canadian   First   Nations,   several   US   tribal   governments, environmentalists,   and   white   ranchers—organized   as   the   Cowboy   Indian Alliance—activists  convinced the  Obama  administration that  the  risks  of  the pipeline outweighed the benefits. While President Obama emphasized climate change as the biggest reason for denying the permit, among the unacceptable risks for the coalitions was the pipeline’s potential to contaminate the Ogallala Aquifer,  a  massive  but  shallow  and vulnerable  underground water  table  that spans eight states from South Dakota in the north to the Texas Panhandle in the south and yields approximately 30 percent of the nation’s groundwater used for irrigation.36
US water law is complex  and its history  is deeply  intertwined with Indian treaty rights, regulated through the Winter’s Doctrine of 1908. Predating other water-use  law  due  to the  creation of  the  reservations,  the  Winter’s  Doctrine affirms  the  reserved  rights  of  Indian  access  to  water,  especially  in  the  arid western states where most reservations are, placing legal power in federal courts. The law does not quantify the amount of water that prioritizes Indian allocation, and these rights are often challenged and litigated, and made more complicated by the 1952 McCarran Amendment in which Congress extended jurisdiction to state courts to hear disputes on reserved Indian rights.37  Despite the “first in time, first in right” foundation of the law, securing actual access to water often means decades-long legal battles and, beginning in the 1980s, led to negotiated settlements.   As   of   2015,   there   were   at   least   twenty-seven   confirmed congressional water settlements, thirty-two tribes with federal settlement teams to  negotiate  in  litigated  cases,  and  roughly  two  hundred  fifty  tribes  with unquantified water rights.38 Prior to the era of water settlements and despite the reserved rights doctrine, throughout most of the twentieth century tribes were on the losing side of water conflicts, and the long-term effect of these negotiated settlements remains unclear. What is clear is that “losing” means tribal loss of access to water, which is common is some communities.39  According  to one study, for example, 13 percent of Alaska Natives and 25–40 percent of people on the Navajo Nation still rely  on hauling  water. Hauling  water is more than a matter of inconvenience; it is a health issue, given that it makes them more susceptible to water-borne diseases and that exposure to climate change leads to increased vulnerability.40
The issue of water quality is equally complicated. For one thing, under the Clean Water Act federal law treats the authority of tribes the same as states and

allows   jurisdiction  over   non-Indians   within  and  even  beyond  reservation boundaries, which adds to the legal complexities.41 In one well-known example, the Pueblo of Isleta in New Mexico won a Supreme Court case in 1998, which upheld  the  tribe’s  ability  to  enforce  water  quality  standards  for  the  city  of Albuquerque. But having the right to enforce those standards doesn’t guarantee pollution won’t happen anyway. According to one story in 2015, violations of the Clean Water Act by  the upstream entities of Albuquerque, Santa Fe, Rio Rancho, and Kirtland Air Force Base are so consistent and egregious that Isleta sometimes has to stop using river water for religious ceremonies, which the tribe perceives  as  a  threat  to its  very  existence.  With toxic  contaminants  such as undertreated sewage water, arsenic, aluminum, PCBs, and lead, it also raises questions  about  the  health  of  people  who  eat  crops  irrigated  by  that  same water.42
Also in 2015, the San Juan River, which runs through the Navajo Nation in northern New Mexico, was poisoned when an abandoned gold mine, known as the Gold King Mine, near Silverton, Colorado, spilled three million gallons of acidic  wastewater  containing  iron,  aluminum,  manganese,  lead,  copper,  and other heavy metals into the Animas River, a tributary of the San Juan. The spill turned the rivers a sickening  yellow-orange, and underground wells used for drinking water were also contaminated. The rivers are used by the Navajos and other communities for ranching  and irrigation; around two thousand Navajos were affected, and crop damage to Navajo farms was widespread. The Gold King  Mine  was  managed  by  the  EPA,  which  admitted  responsibility  and promised  to  pay  $4.5  million  in  emergency  costs  to  state,  local,  and  tribal governments.  But  they  rebuffed accountability  to the  victims  of  the  disaster when in January 2017 they announced that they would refuse to pay seventy-three  claims  filed  against  them—to  the  tune  of  $20.4  million—based  on sovereign immunity, which bars most lawsuits against the federal government.43 The EPA reported the same month that there were no long-term effects to the water quality of the rivers. The Navajo Nation is, understandably, not so easily convinced, given their history with uranium mining on the reservation, and is conducting  its  own studies  in conjunction with Northern Arizona  University, University of Arizona, Fort Lewis College, and Diné College to understand the long-term ramifications to the Navajo community.44
Climate  change  poses  an entirely  new  set  of  problems  relative  to water’s ability  to  sustain  life  in  tribal  communities.  Hydrologists  and  other  climate change scientists identify  various impacts  climate change is  having  on tribal water  resources,  including  (1)  supply  and  management,  (2)  aquatic  species

important  for  culture  and  subsistence,  (3)  ranching  and  agriculture  due  to weather extremes like droughts and floods, (4) sovereignty and rights, and (5) soil quality, as it is affected by coastal and riverine erosion (causing the need to relocate) or from drought-related land degradation.45  In Alaska—home to 227 federally recognized Native villages—subsistence hunting of land- and ocean-based animals like caribou and walrus and salmon fishing are still a way of life. Global warming results in thinning and other changes to sea ice, in turn altering hunting  patterns.  Permafrost  thawing  makes  the  traditional  practice  of  food storage in underground cellars less reliable, contributes to riverine erosion, and because the ground can absorb more water it can decrease lake water levels, causing water supply problems and increased risk for water-borne diseases.46 In the  lower  forty-eight  states,  climate  change  poses  numerous  problems  that compromise traditional practices, especially related to food systems. Warming air  and  water  temperatures  and  decreased  water  levels  disrupt  river  flows necessary  for  healthy  salmon populations.  In coastal  areas,  encroaching  seas inundate freshwater habitats, threatening shellfish resources and traditional foods like roots and berries. Increasing aridity and drought in the west result in loss of grazing lands and native plant species, in addition to diminished water supplies. In the Great Plains and Midwest, drought interferes with water supplies and the ability to feed livestock. Low water levels result in warmer waters, algal blooms, and   fish   die-offs.   Earlier   snowmelts   compromise   late   season   irrigation. Unreliable   temperatures   cause   wild   and   cultivated   crop   losses.   Extreme fluctuations  between  drought  and  flood,  for  example,  interrupted  manoomin harvesting  in  2007  for  the  Bad  River  Band  of  the  Lake  Superior  Tribe  of Chippewa in Wisconsin and in 2013 for the Fond du Lac Reservation. In the east and south, increased flooding, early snowmelt, warmer water temperatures, sea level  rise,  and  coastal  erosion  deplete  fish  and  shellfish  resources  in  tribal communities that still rely on these traditional food sources.47 The first climate refugees in the US are the Biloxi Chitimacha people of Isle de Jean Charles, whose island home in southern Louisiana is being inundated due to rising sea levels.  The  relocation  of  the  Biloxi  Chitimacha  people  is  also  particularly complex, because it involves the relocation of an entire community, not just individuals.
In short, settler colonialism and the industrial revolution set into motion a torrent  of  environmental  effects  that  have  been  detrimental  to  the  health  of Native  peoples  for  centuries  and  are  exacerbated  in  the  present  by  climate change.  But  despite  the  odds,  Native  people  have  survived because  of  their ability to creatively resist, adapt, and meet the challenges modernity has thrown

at  them.  And  now  in  the  twenty-first  century,  the  creative  resistance  and adaptability of Native nations is reflected in the ways they are reclaiming their food traditions and taking control of their food systems.


FOOD SY STEMS AND SOVEREIGNTY MOVEMENT
“When I first heard the term ‘food sovereignty,’ I thought, Hmmm, does that mean that plants and animals will have treaty  rights and reservations?” says Valerie Segrest, community nutritionist, Native foods educator, and coordinator of the food sovereignty project of the Muckleshoot Indian Tribe. “Because in tribal communities that term ‘sovereignty’carries significant meaning. It upholds our right to practice our culture,” she tells the audience in her TEDxRainer talk in 2013.48 She goes on to tell the story of how her ancestor, one of the original negotiators of the treaty of Point Elliott in 1855, expressed that his number one priority  was for the ability  of the Muckleshoot people to maintain access to traditional foods. “At the core of tribal sovereignty is food sovereignty. This is significant because we know that our traditional foods are a pillar of our culture, and that they feed much more than our physical bodies; they feed our spirits. . . . They are living links with our land and our legacy, helping us to remember who we are and where we come from,” Segrest declares with a confident but demure smile.
In Indian country, the Muckleshoot Food Sovereignty Project (MFSP) is often a model for other tribal food sovereignty projects, and Segrest is a leader in the movement.  Food  systems  studies  and  food  sovereignty  projects  are  often initiated with funding from academic, government, or philanthropic institutions. The University of Arkansas School of Law’s Indigenous Food and Agriculture Initiative,  for  example,  produced  the  Feeding  Ourselves  Report  in  2015,  in partnership with the  American Heart  Association,  the  Robert  Wood Johnson Foundation, and two private Native organizations, Echo Hawk Consulting and Pipestem Law. The eighty-four-page report clarified the relationship between the United States’ history of colonization and current health disparities with a focus on   food   and   made   recommendations   for   funders,   policy   makers,   and stakeholders about how to engage more deeply with the issues and work toward real solutions.49  Covering every conceivable aspect of tribal food systems, the report connected the dots between the historical impacts of federal Indian policy and  the  changes  it  brought  to  Indian  people’s  health,  current  food  access problems, Native agriculture, federal food programs, community development, funding, training, and education, and it offered tribally  centered and specific approaches to healthy food production in Indian country.

Some corporate funding for food system projects, such as that provided by the W. K. Kellogg Foundation, filters down to Native-run granting organizations like the First Nations Development Institute. Between 2011 and 2017, the foundation awarded nearly $4 million to First Nations, which in turn made grants to dozens of Native nations all over the United States, including Alaska and Hawaii. The movement has gained tremendous momentum over the past few years, and First Nations holds an annual food sovereignty conference, bringing together Native nations from all over the US who are interested in gaining greater control over their food systems.50 The food sovereignty movement sweeping through Indian country is sophisticated and broad, and it’s transformational on numerous levels, representing one of the most powerful ways Native nations can exercise their political sovereignty while simultaneously reclaiming their cultural sovereignty. While the federal government is bound by a treaty-based relationship of trust to tribal  nations  on  one  hand,  on  the  other,  self-determination  is  a  process  of transcending a relationship of dependency that has kept Native people trapped in cycles  of  poverty  and  failing  health.  The  assertion  of  cultural  and  political sovereignty enables Native communities to take greater control over their lives and  lands  while  holding  the  federal  government  accountable  to  its  legal responsibilities.
The   Muckleshoot   Food   Sovereignty	Project   is   a   larger   framework encompassing  distinct  projects  that  all  contribute  to  the  goal  of  increasing expertise regarding tribal food systems and improving the quality of the food Muckleshoot  people  eat,  all  with  a  focus  on  revitalizing  culture  through traditional foods. It is holistic in that it also contains an economic component that identifies the MFSP as a vehicle for economic sustainability by reforming the  Muckleshoot  food distribution system  while  it  also improves  community food quality. In the most recent phase of the MFSP, for example, an extensive community-wide food sovereignty  assessment conducted in 2016–17 revealed not only that community members overwhelmingly desired to restore traditional foods to their diets but also that the reliance upon grocery  stores outside the Muckleshoot community resulted in a net loss to the Muckleshoot economy of between  $1.04  and  $3.14  million  each  year.51   This  has  opened  up  new discussions about how the tribe can attain greater economic control as part of its efforts to generate greater control of its food system. As the examples of other tribal communities show, this might include a tribally run grocery store, farmer’s market, and other kinds of food production capacity building.
The Oneida Nation of Wisconsin, for instance, have a five-pronged integrated food system designed to combat diabetes, which includes food production (and a

farm-to-school program), building local economies, food outlets, a community elder center, and sustainable practices. The Oneida Market in Green Bay features products  created by  tribal  businesses,  including  black  angus  beef  and bison, handmade herbal teas, herbal remedies and essential oils, and other food items. Holistic approaches to food system transformation are inventive in other ways, not  the  least  of  which  for  the  ways  they  include  youth  development.  The Suquamish community in Washington State has a program where elders teach youth about wild plant harvesting as part of a youth internship. The extensive ten-week program spans food systems, traditional plant knowledge, and tribal culture. In other examples, the Muscogee Creeks’ Food Sovereignty  Initiative includes the establishment of a Food and Fitness Policy Council as a first step toward  encouraging  more  healthy  food  choices  in  the  community.  And  the Lummi  Nation  adopted  a  “Stop  the  Pop”  campaign  to  encourage  healthier choices in school vending machines and at tribal events.
The history  of American Indians in the twentieth century  is the story  of a comeback from the brink of almost total annihilation at the hands of a settler population   that   benefitted   from   the   demise   of   the   Indigenous.   Indian “survivance” has always been a matter of Native ingenuity aided by allies and accomplices  working  against  the  genocidal  impulse  of  the  State—sometimes within the State governmental structure itself but often outside it—in support of tribal  self-determination.52   In  the  twenty-first  century,  the  food  sovereignty movement may be the epitome of these partnerships, with organizations borne from,  or  at  least  influenced  by,  the  environmental  movement.  As  this  book attempts  to  show,  environmental  justice  and  injustice  are  threads  woven throughout  all  aspects  of  Native  life,  and  linkages  between  the  health  of Indigenous bodies, the agency of tribal nations, the altruism of allies, and the environmental movement have taken a long time to build, and are in fact still developing. But friends have always been hard to find in Indian country, and things   have   not   always   been   smooth   between   Native   peoples   and   the environmental movement, as we will see in the following pages.




C H A P T E R    F I V E




(Not So) Strange Bedfellows

Indian Country’s Ambivalent Relationship with the Environmental Movement

In the old days there used to be lots more game—deer, quail, gray squirrels, rabbits. They burned to keep down the brush. The fires wouldn’t get away from you. It wouldn’t take all the timber like it would now. In those times the creeks ran all year round. You could fish all season. Now you can’t because there’s no water. Timber and brush now take all the water. . . . I remember Yosemite when I was a kid; You could see from one end of the Valley to the other. Now you can’t even see off the road. There were big oaks and big pines and no brush. There were nice meadows in there.

—JAMES RUST, SOUTHERN SIERRA MIWOK1

There is a long-standing debate within the environmental movement about its historical  origins.  Some  point  to  the  1962  publication  of  Rachel  Carson’s seminal  book  Silent  Spring  and  accounts  of  the  first  Earth  Day  in  1970. Depending on the author, either of these two events is hailed as the beginning of the modern environmental movement. With her groundbreaking book, Rachel Carson  alerted  postwar  America  about  the  unintended  consequences  of  the chemical industry on the natural world—and inevitably humans—leading to the banning of DDT in the US. Then, in 1969 a massive oil spill off the coast of Santa Barbara—the worst spill in US history until the Exxon Valdez disaster in 1989—led to the creation of the National Environmental Protection Act later that year and the Environmental Protection Agency in 1970. Growing awareness of environmental  pollution,  driven in large  part  by  a  burgeoning  counterculture movement, inspired international Earth Day proclamations in 1970, signaling the awakening of a global environmental consciousness.
But a deeper history, one that depicts a continuum of environmental thought in the US, dates back more than a century before the teach-ins of tie-dyed liberal college   students   who   are   sometimes   associated   with   birthing	today’s

environmentalism.   Many   historians   trace   the   genealogy   of   the   modern environmental movement to the ideals of mid-nineteenth-century naturalists and the creation of the national park  system, and the preservation movement that started it. Born from the Manifest Destiny ideologies of western expansion, the preservation  movement  was  deeply  influenced  by  a  national  fixation  on  the imagined pre-Columbian pristine American wilderness and the social Darwinist values of white superiority. As this chapter reveals, those legacies carried forth into twentieth-century environmental organizing. The result was a contentious— and	sometimes	openly	antagonistic—relationship	between	modern environmentalists    and	American	Indians,	making    the	attainment	of environmental justice for Native people more difficult. It outlines patterns of divergence—where  the  goals  of  environmentalists  worked  in  opposition  to Native peoples—and more recently where they meet in a convergence of shared objectives that characterize the changing nature of the relationship, resulting in more productive partnerships and greater justice for both the environment and Native peoples.


THE PRESERVATION MOVEMENT AND NATIONAL PARKS
Historians of the environmental movement often locate the movement’s genesis in mid-nineteenth-century literature, most commonly invoking writers such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, and John Muir. After Emerson composed  a  book   titled  Nature   in  1836,   a   new,   mystical   religious   and philosophical movement called transcendentalism began to emerge in Boston, Emerson its founder, with the help of Thoreau and others. Believing that a direct experience with the divine could be attained through intimate interaction with nature,   both   became   known   as   naturalists   in   what   was   a   new,   highly romanticized, and particularly American version of naturalism.2 While Emerson and Thoreau were paving fresh intellectual ground in the East, the artist George Catlin (who was unconnected to the Transcendentalist movement) was traveling out west documenting the last of the “wild” Indian tribes, becoming famous for the hundreds of paintings that are now his legacy and for beginning a national dialogue on the need for national parks. He published several books, among them the classic Letters and Notes on the Manners, Customs, and Condition of the  North American Indians  in 1841.  In the  book,  Catlin lamented what  he believed was the beginning of the extinction of the buffalo and the tribes who depended on them.  He  proposed that  the  US  should create  a  “Nations’ park containing man and beast, in all the wild and freshness of their nature’s beauty!” Catlin’s work  was influential and widely  acclaimed, and while the idea for a

national  park  was  not  yet  taken  seriously,  a  growing  national  angst  about modernity made conditions ripe for it by the early 1870s.
The national park system has long been lauded as “America’s greatest idea,” but only relatively recently has it begun to be more deeply questioned. In his 1999 book Dispossessing the Wilderness: Indian Removal and the Making of the National  Parks,  Mark  David  Spence  delivered  a  long-overdue  critique  that linked the creation of the first national parks with the federal policy of Indian removal. Spence points out that the first so-called wilderness areas that had been deemed  in  need  of  preserving  were  not  only  and  in  actuality  Indigenous-occupied landscapes when the first national parks were established, but also that an uninhabited wilderness had to first be created. He examines the creation of Yellowstone, Glacier, and Yosemite National Parks in particular to illustrate the way  the  myth of  uninhabited virgin wilderness  has  for  more  than a  century obscured a history of Native land dispossession in the name of preservation and conservation and serves as the foundation of the environmental movement.3 The creation of Yellowstone as the first national park is instructive for understanding how the language of preservation evolved over time. What is today Yellowstone National  Park   (which  lies  predominantly   within  the  northwest  corner  of Wyoming and slightly within Montana and Idaho) was originally the territory of numerous tribal nations, including Shoshone, Bannock, Crow, Nez Perce, and other smaller tribes and bands. The treaties of Fort Bridger and Fort Laramie in 1868 ceded large tracts of land to the US and created separate reservations for the  tribes  but  retained the  right  of  the  continued use  of  the  ceded lands  for hunting and other subsistence activities. Although early settlers had claimed the Indians avoided the Yellowstone area due to superstitions about the geysers, they in fact had long used the lands, a rich source of game and medicinal and edible plants, for spiritual ceremonies and other purposes.
After the park’s establishment in 1872 the Indians continued to frequent the area, especially since limited reservation land and government food rations were insufficient to feed the people, and the threat of starvation constantly loomed. According   to   Spence,   Yellowstone,   with   its   mesmerizing   geysers   and otherworldly geologic formations, was set aside initially not in the interest of preserving wilderness but as a “wonderland” for its unique natural features—an ideal tourist attraction. But the threat of private development such as mining interests,  timber  exploitation,  and  railroads  combined  with  fears  about  the depletion of game, fish, and timber, changed the government’s rationale for the park.  By  1886  the  Department  of  Interior’s  stated  purpose  for  the  park’s existence was the preservation of the wilderness (animals, fish, and trees), to be enforced  by  the  military,  which  was  already  aggressively  pursuing  resistant

Indians throughout the Plains. Anxiety about hunting in the park over the next few years led to the passage of the Lacey  Act in 1894, a law prohibiting all hunting within park boundaries, including Indian hunting—in direct violation of treaty protections. A legal challenge to the law resulted in the US Supreme Court case Ward v. Race Horse in 1896 in which, as Spence contends, the court ruled that the creation of Yellowstone National Park  and the Lacey  Act effectively signaled Congress’s plenary authority to nullify Indian hunting rights at will, at a time when both judicial and congressional decisions persistently eroded Indian rights. Race Horse was overruled by the Supreme Court in a 1999 case brought by Minnesota’s Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians, but in a separate 2016 case a Wyoming state court rejected the Crow’s treaty right to hunt on federal lands within the state. That case is still pending in a state appellate court. These cases demonstrate the contradictions in law when state and federal law conflict relative to Indian treaty rights.
The lingering result of the Yellowstone story is that coded within the language of preservation, “wilderness” landscapes—always already in need of protection —are, or should be, free from human presence. But this logic completely evades the  fact  of  ancient  Indigenous  habitation and cultural  use  of  such places.  In Spence’s  words,  “the  context  and  motives  that  led  to  the  idealization  of uninhabited wilderness not only  helps to explain what national parks actually preserve but also reveals the degree to which older cultural values continue to shape current environmentalist and preservationist thinking.”4  In other words, the paradigm of human-free wilderness articulated by early preservationists laid a foundation for the twentieth-century  environmental movement in extremely problematic  ways.  When  environmentalists  laud  “America’s  best  idea”  and reiterate   narratives   about   pristine   national   park   environments,   they   are participating  in  the  erasure  of  Indigenous  peoples,  thus  replicating  colonial patterns of white supremacy and settler privilege.


THE MY TH OF THE WILDERNESS AND THE REALITY OF INDIAN LAND MANAGEMENT
If anyone were to be called the patron saint of the environmental movement it would surely be Thoreau. Although he was not widely read in his time, the real impact of his work  would manifest later, particularly  as a result of his (and Emerson’s) influence on John Muir. Both Thoreau’s and Muir’s views on nature and what humans’ relationship to it ought to be were shaped by their experience with   Indians,   about   whom   both   wrote   in   published   and   unpublished manuscripts.5  Biographers of Thoreau and Muir tend to admire Thoreau and

Muir’s views on American Indians, praising them as progressive “Indianists” at a  time  of  intensifying  violent  colonization of  the  continent,  but  also tend to downplay   the   extent   to   which   both   men   were   influenced   by   popular anthropological narratives of Indian inferiority—what we today call the savage and noble savage tropes. In the process, these commentators often reinforce the patronizing, romanticized views that prevented Americans from seeing Native peoples as fully  human in the first place. The overly  romantic and fetishized view of Indian closeness with nature (conceived, for example, as “mystical,” “primeval,”   and   “primal”)   inevitably   invokes   Indians   as   childlike   and intellectually  unevolved. Worse, it evades US accountability  for its genocidal expropriation  of  the  continent—based  on  the  very   justification  of  Indian inferiority—and the violation of its own constitutional law about treaties being the supreme law of the land.6
Thoreau, especially, wrote extensively about American Indians. Fascinated by the Indians’ closeness to nature, he studied their history and cultures and later in his life befriended Penobscots Joe Aitteon and Joe Polis, whom he had hired as guides, documenting his adventures with them in his classic work The Maine Woods. He clearly  had a great admiration for the way  Indians lived, and he perceived   in   their   spirituality   a   mysticism   that   appealed   to   his   own Transcendentalist  orientation.  Yet  inescapably  woven  throughout  Thoreau’s writings about Indians is also a romantic draw to the “wildness” of Indian life— the noble savagery of the Indian, who by virtue of his primitiveness is worthy of respect, because, at least in part, he resists the corruption of the white man’s civilization. Thoreau may  have appreciated Indians more than most European Americans,  but  he  was  still  a  man of  his  times  and reflected popular  social Darwinist views when he wrote in 1858,

Who can doubt this essential and innate difference between man and man, when he considers a whole race, like the Indian, inevitably and resignedly passing  away  in  spite  of  our  efforts  to  Christianize  and  educate  them? Individuals accept their fate and live according to it, as the Indian does. Everybody notices that the Indian retains his habits wonderfully, is still the same man that the discoverers found. The fact is, the history of the white man is a history  of improvement, that of the red man a history  of fixed habits of stagnation.7

Thoreau  read  Samuel  George  Morton’s  Crania  Americana  (1839),  and embraced Morton’s theories of Indian cultural and intellectual lowliness.8  Even as he occupied himself with absorbing all he could about Indian life, fixating on

everything from the Indian physique to funeral customs, Thoreau seemed never to  have  grasped  that  the  New  England  wilderness,  already  so  altered  by European settlement in his time, had in the precolonial period been a cultural landscape  shaped  by  centuries  of  Indian  intervention  on  the  land,  not  the untouched pristine environment he and many of his contemporaries imagined.9
The  history  of  national  parks,  shaped  by  ideologies  of  preservation  and conservation  that  Thoreau  and  similar  naturalists  inspired,  has  a  long  track record of severing Indians from living on, or traditional uses of, their ancestral lands. Similar versions of the Yellowstone story played out in the early days of numerous national parks, including  Glacier, Mount Rainier, Mount McKinley (now  Denali),  Death  Valley,  Grand  Canyon,  Mesa  Verde,  and  many  others. National park historians Robert Keller and Michael Turek identify four phases the national park system exhibited as it gradually improved its relationship with tribes, particularly  in the latter half of the twentieth century, but by  then the stubborn  narratives  about  Indian  savagery  and  inferiority  that  justified  their removal from parklands had cemented themselves into the national imagination and infiltrated the consciousness of early environmentalists.10  The racist tropes are found throughout the historical literature of the late nineteenth and early twentieth  centuries  and  are  all  too  familiar:  Indians  were  lazy,  stupid,  and childlike, conniving beggars and treacherous liars. But ironically, they were also sometimes characterized as ignorant of their own environments, wasteful users of the land. In 1923, for instance, one ranger in Glacier National Park, enforcing no-hunting laws (which violated the treaty  rights of the Blackfeet) inside the park,  commented  that  “unless  the  Indians  are  curbed  in  their  desire  to  kill everything in sight Glacier Park will soon have no game.”11
The view that Native peoples were incapable of managing their own lands in intelligent and innovative ways was evident in the early  years of government management of Yosemite, but it also reflects the very different cultural values that shaped their own use of the land. When the first white settlers observed the magnificent “cathedral” of Yosemite Valley, they described vast open meadows covered  in  “luxuriant  native  grasses  and  flowering  plants,”12   a  place  that “presented the appearance of a well-kept park,”13  “an appearance of a prairie planted with fruit trees.”14  These observers were there early enough to witness how  the  valley  had  been  managed  for  centuries  by  Native  peoples.  With techniques like controlled burns and even hand removal of young willows and cottonwoods,  the  growth  of  a  thick  and  highly  combustible  understory  was averted, helping to prevent uncontrollable fires. Ethnobotanist M. Kat Anderson, whose  voluminous  analysis  of  California  Indian  land  management  broke

intellectual  ground  in  Native  studies,  noted  that  “much  of  the  landscape  in California that so impressed early writers, photographers, and landscape painters was in fact a cultural landscape, not the wilderness they imagined. While they extolled  the  ‘natural’ qualities  of  the  California  landscape,  they  were  really responding  to  its  human  influence.”15   But,  as  the  epigraph  to  this  chapter indicates,  within  a  few  short  decades  of  bureaucratic  management  Yosemite Valley would become almost unrecognizable to its Indigenous inhabitants.
Before it became a national park in 1890, Yosemite was a state park under a grant  from  President  Abraham  Lincoln in 1864,  but  its  history  with Indians differs  from  that  of  Yellowstone  and  Glacier.  The  Yosemite  Indians  were violently expelled from the valley with the Mariposa Indian War of 1850–51, but unlike the Rocky Mountain Indians, the Yosemites were gradually allowed to return within a few years and resume much of their previous customary land-based  practices,  including  hunting,  fishing,  and  food  gathering.16   Limited numbers  of  them  lived  in  the  park  for  another  century,  contributing  to  the Yosemite tourist economy  through the exploitation of their labor and culture. Yosemite was established as a tourist destination from its earliest days, and the presence of Indians still living largely in their traditional manner lent an aura of authenticity and mystique to park visitors’ “wilderness experience,” rationalizing their continued existence in the park to the bureaucrats who maintained it. But with the tight controls of government bureaucracies came the loss of traditional environmental management Yosemite’s Indigenous peoples had maintained for centuries.
As the federal government evolved its wilderness management practices, so did its philosophical slant toward it. From the national parks’ inception in 1916 until  well  into the  1930s,  the  “wonderland”17  approach to land management prevailed, and as early as 1872 the national parks were conceived of as national “pleasuring grounds.”18  Ironically, the Park  Service’s guiding philosophy  was more about catering to tourists than it was about actually preserving wilderness —however problematic the concept of wilderness was. Even the national parks’ Organic Act (its founding document) directed park managers to manipulate the landscape   as   necessary   to  improve   views,   which  could  be   achieved  by “dispos[ing] of timber” or killing predatory animals that reduced populations of popular game animals like deer and mountain sheep, which tourists expected to see.19  In Yosemite, Indians were prohibited in the late 1800s from hunting and their controlled burning practices. So, by the turn of the century the valley had become  transformed  from  an  Indigenous  cared-for  cultural  landscape  to  a cultural  landscape  based  on  the  projection  of  an  imagined,  commodified,

European American wilderness.20
Unpacking  the  philosophical  foundations  of  the  early   conservation  and preservation movements is crucial to understanding how the formal, organized environmental   movement   would  unfold  throughout   the   twentieth  century, informed  as  it  was  by  its  not-so-hidden  prejudices  and  stereotypes  about American   Indian   people   and   the   overarching   master   narrative   of   white supremacy,   and  also  by   wilderness   as   a   historically   contingent,   socially constructed idea. John Muir and the founding  of the Sierra Club was at the temporal intersection of these eras, bridging the nineteenth-century era’s savagist narratives and the twentieth-century federal move toward (re)recognizing Native sovereignty and self-determination. But they were far from the only ones.


WHITE SUPREMAC Y AND THE SEEDS OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL MOVEMENT
Few terms in American vernacular English can elicit the kind of emotionally charged response that “white supremacy” can. Americans like to think that since the civil rights era, we have achieved the postracial, meritocratic, multicultural state where color blindness and equal opportunity  prevails. Both liberals and conservatives like to think that racism is defined only by hostile behavior from which individuals can excuse themselves because they have friends, employees, perhaps an old lover or two who are people of color. In this way of thinking, white supremacy is an ideology restricted only to rogue alt-right neo-Nazis or white-nationalist fringe groups, and certainly not well-meaning everyday people, whether conservative or liberal. While white supremacy is most definitely at the root  of  those  regressive  social  movements,  as  a  foundational  worldview constructed by centuries of white European settlement of the United States, it is far broader than that. It is the thread from which the American social fabric is woven. A few decades of laws promoting racial justice have failed to unravel the systemic forms that white supremacy has taken, reflected by a range of social indicators from chronic wealth inequality to negative educational outcomes to disproportionate   rates   of   violence   (police,   sexual,   and   domestic)   and incarceration in communities of color. Centuries of dehumanization of American Indians, African Americans, and ethnic minority “others” has left its mark on the American mind and in its institutions, refusing to die.
In Indian country, white supremacy was never limited to just racial inferiority, since ideologies of religious and cultural inadequacy predated it, as the previous discussion on the foundations of federal Indian law, particularly the doctrine of Christian  discovery,  revealed.  That  Native  people  were  inferior  to  white

Europeans was a given and widely accepted by the general public well before and after the nineteenth century. It was as true for John Muir as it was for his predecessor  Henry  Thoreau.  Some  writers  claim  that  Muir’s  racist  views  on Indians stemmed from his postimmigration childhood in Wisconsin’s Winnebago territory and became intensified after coming to California. When Muir arrived in  San  Francisco  in  1868,  California  was  engaged  in  an  open  campaign  of extermination of California Indians, which he didn’t seem to ever have actively opposed. Instrumental in the creation of Yosemite National Park, he supported the expulsion of the Yosemite Indians from their ancient home in the valley and journaled his experiences with and thoughts about California “digger” Indians (a derogatory  term even then), whom he found dirty, lazy, ugly, and altogether disappointing. Muir’s apologists like to point out that his views about Indians evolved over time, especially  after his travels to Alaska where he spent time among  Tlingits  and  other  Alaska  and  Pacific  Northwest  Natives,  gradually growing  more  favorable  ideas  about  Indigenous  peoples.  It’s  true  that  his opinions improved over time, but Muir never fully shed his views of Indigenous inferiority that were shaped by his religious upbringing. In Alaska Natives he may have been more able to see a noble culture that lived in harmony with its environment,  but  even in this  case  he  never  transcended a  deeply  ingrained pattern of Christian paternalism that presupposed Natives as culturally deficient and in need of Christian improvement.21  At a time of profound oppression of Native people, Muir’s “evolution” can be said to have risen to no more than old-fashioned European American benevolent supremacy.
The idea of wilderness as conceived by preservationists and conservationists was a white-settler social construct. It imagined an unpeopled, wild landscape as pristine,  pure,  and  unspoiled,  and  as  the  environmental  historian  Carolyn Merchant asserts, reflected values that equated wilderness with whiteness and, after  postbellum  black  urban  migration,  cities  with  darkness  and  depravity. These tropes, rooted in policies of removal and segregation, she argues, led to the ideal of  an American “colonized Eden,” a  “controlled, managed garden” from which colonized Indigenous peoples, immigrants, and people of color were systematically  excluded and which led to patterns of toxic waste dumping in communities  of  color.22  It  is  against  this  backdrop that  the  Sierra  Club,  the United States’ first nongovernmental, environmentally focused organization, was founded in 1892, with John Muir at the helm as one of its founding members and first elected president. Established initially as a mountaineering enthusiast club, its mission was “‘to explore, enjoy, and render accessible the mountain regions of the Pacific Coast; to publish authentic information concerning them,’ and ‘to

enlist the support and cooperation of the people and government in preserving the forests and other natural features of the Sierra Nevada.’”23 From its inception the Sierra Club’s agenda was to protect Northern California’s wilderness areas, which by then had been largely cleared of California’s Indigenous population, with the survivors of the state’s genocidal policies confined to small rancherias and reservations. It also dovetailed with the federal policy of forced assimilation legislated  by  the  1887  Dawes  Act  in  the  immediate  post-Indian-war  period. Nationwide, with the Indian population at record low numbers, safely contained within  reservation  boundaries  and  guarded  by  strictly  enforced  laws  against hunting  outside those bounds, the stage was set for a burgeoning  new phase aimed  at  protecting  what  remained  of  the  United  States’ “wild”  places  and animals. On the heels of the industrial revolution and western expansion, and with a still-growing national infrastructure, protecting the environment—framed as preservation and conservation—would be a matter of balancing the needs of development with wise use of land and natural resources.
The  first  few  decades  of  the  twentieth  century  saw  the  establishment  of numerous nongovernmental organizations and governmental agencies and laws oriented toward preservation and conservation. Among them are the National Audubon Society (1905), Antiquities Act (1906), National Park Service (1916), National Parks Conservation Association (1919), Izaak Walton League (1922), Wilderness   Society   (1922),   Civilian  Conservation  Corps   (1933),   National Wildlife   Federation   (1936),   Defenders   of   Wildlife   (1947),   and   Nature Conservancy (1951). While naturalists worked to protect lands acquired through centuries  of  aggressively   imposed  treaties  and  a  variety   of  other  legally sanctioned land grabs, tribes struggled to hold on to what remained of their land bases and cultures. By 1934, with the passage of the Wheeler Howard Act, a new policy direction was ushered in, influenced by a new generation of Western-educated Indians. Also called the Indian Reorganization Act, or the “Indian New Deal,” the law allowed tribes to organize their own tribal governments patterned after the US Constitution. It reversed the assimilation policy  and empowered newly reconstituted tribal governments to have greater management of their own land and mineral rights (still, however, under the close supervision of the Bureau of Indian Affairs), building capacity for economic development as the answer to the intractable poverty that choked tribal communities.
By  1949,  under  the  Truman  administration,  assimilation  was  back  on  the table,  and  in  1953  Congress  passed  House  Concurrent  Resolution  108,  also known  as  the  termination  bill.  Conceived  as  a  final  solution  to  the  “Indian problem,” termination was framed as the liberation of tribes from the yoke of federal supervision. In reality, it was no less than another push for the federal

government   to  abrogate   its   treaty   obligations   and  end  its   administrative responsibilities  to  Indians,  and  another  land  grab.  Under  termination,  tribal governments were dissolved, their lands transferred into white settler ownership, and more than twelve thousand individual Indians absorbed into the American mainstream, no longer legally recognized as Indians. The termination policy’s relocation  program  transferred  thousands  of  Indians  from  their  reservation homes to large cities, causing  a population shift away  from the reservations. More than one hundred tribes were terminated throughout the 1950s and ’60s— at least forty-six in California alone—with particularly disastrous effects on the Menominee in Wisconsin and Klamath in southern Oregon. But the winds of change were blowing in the US with a growing civil rights movement and once again Indians were organizing, this time on college campuses and in urban areas like Minneapolis, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Seattle, and beyond. The new Red  Power  movement  activated  Indian  people  on  and  off  reservations  who argued for resistance to termination and for honoring the treaty relationship. A policy   shift   to  self-determination  solidified  a   government   to  government relationship,  which  by  the  1980s  would  come  to  be  articulated  in  the  legal language of tribal sovereignty. New laws enabled tribal governments to pursue economic  development  projects,  from  resource  development  to  gaming,  by reacquiring   federal  recognition  and  traditional  homelands  and  revitalizing cultural practices—sending  them at times on a collision course with the new environmental movement.


THE MODERN ENVIRONMENTAL MOVEMENT AND C LASHES WITH INDIAN C OUNTRY
The Red Power movement was just one aspect of the social revolution that swept across the American social landscape in the 1960s and ’70s, paralleling other ethnic   nationalisms,   women’s   liberation,   the   antiwar   movement,   and   the emergence   of   a   new,   rebellious,   and   predominantly   white   middle-class counterculture.  Disenchanted  with  the  conservative  values  of  their  parents’ generation  and  witnessing  the  increasing  degradation  of  the  environment, countercultural  youth  looked  to  other   cultures   for   answers   to  existential questions  they  perceived  as  unavailable  in  mainstream  American  society.  In American Indians they, like Thoreau and Muir before them, saw a relationship to nature that should be emulated, inspiring a back-to-the-land movement and an aesthetic   that   unequivocally	evoked   the   Indian—long   hair,   headbands, moccasins, beads and feathers, leather and fringe, turquoise and silver.
In 1971, just a few months after the first Earth Day signaled the beginning of a

modern environmental movement, Indians unwittingly became the symbol of the new  movement  with  the  famous  “Crying  Indian”  antilittering  commercial released by Keep America Beautiful, Inc. The image of a buckskin-clad Indian, with a single tear rolling down his face as a factory spews toxic smoke in the background and trash thrown from a car lands on his beaded moccasins, seared itself into America’s collective consciousness. Never mind that the Indian, Iron Eyes  Cody,  was  no Indian at  all,  but  a  100 percent  Sicilian American actor named Espera Oscar de Corti who had built an entire career—and personal life —on Indian impersonation. The Crying Indian represented what anthropologist Shepard Krech III called the “ecological Indian,” a revamped version of the noble savage who became the stand-in for an environmental ethic the US should aspire  to.24   In  a  strangely  visceral  way,  the  deception  of  Iron  Eyes  Cody mirrored the falseness of the ecological Indian stereotype, because like de Corti’s fake, hyper-Indian image,25 the new stereotype set an impossibly high standard to which white environmentalists would hold Native people for the next several decades. It came at a time when tribal governments had finally regained enough power  to  exercise  self-determination  in  nation-building  projects  that  often involved  exploiting  the  only  things  they  had—natural  resources—setting  the stage for future conflict and discord.
The   relationship   between   the   counterculture   and   Indian   country   was complicated from the beginning. Desiring a deeper connection with the Earth and  a  more  meaningful  form  of  spirituality,  hippies  made  pilgrimages  to reservations searching for the mystical Indian wisdom they had read about in books  like  John Neihardt’s  Black  Elk  Speaks  and Carlos  Castaneda’s  wildly successful  but  fraudulent  series  about  the  Yaqui  shaman  Don Juan  Matus.26 Other  ethnic  frauds  infested  the  literary  counterculture  over  the  next  few decades,  exploiting  the  gullibility  of  the  spiritually  starved  and  building  a lucrative New Age industry in the process.27 The problem was not so much that hippies  looked  to  Indian  country  for  answers.  It  was  that  as  settlers  they unconsciously brought with them worldviews and behavior patterns that were inconsistent with Indigenous paradigms and tried to fit Indigenous worldviews and practices into their own cognitive frameworks. Predominant among  their settler  culture  frameworks  are  the  pursuit  of  universal  truth  and  personal edification, both particularly Christian ideas in the context of the US. If truth is universal, the logic goes, then the truths perceived in Native cultures must be applicable to all people everywhere, and in the United States everyone has the right   to   practice   whatever   religion   they   choose.   Non-Natives   couldn’t comprehend that Native spiritual principles evolved over eons based on ancient

relationships to place and was reflected in language and specific histories, and that the function of Indigenous ceremonies was primarily for the perpetuation of particular  communities,  not  personal  enlightenment.  An orientation based on rugged individualism combined with a  deeply  ingrained sense  of  entitlement (Manifest Destiny  in its modern form) translated into the toxic mimicry  that today we call cultural appropriation, which takes a multitude of forms. At its core, cultural appropriation is always an invocation of “authentic” Indians and Indian  culture  as  constructed  by   settlers,  however  falsely.  The  fetishized authentic   Indian  is   the   representational   production  of   the   culturally   and biologically   “pure”  Indian,  and  the  ecological  Indian  trope  was  just  the counterculture and environmental movement’s version of it.
The	Indian-inspired	back-to-the-land	sensibility	cultivated	by	the counterculture emerged as another iteration of the environmental movement, but it was expressed in distinctly spiritual terms drawn from Native peoples, as the literary examples of Carlos Castaneda and many others demonstrate, however problematically.  Sometimes  referred  to  as  “second-wave  environmentalism,” countercultural hippies, despite their blatant appropriations, did at times work constructively with Indian country. As historian Sherry L. Smith documents, the Pacific Northwest Fish Wars, the cultural revolution in California, the Wounded Knee  occupation,  and  other  places  and  events  saw  productive  partnerships between  hippies  and  Native  people  who  were  working  for  Indian  rights alongside   calls   for   other   social   justice   reforms.   Indians   sometimes   even exploited non-Natives’ misplaced beliefs about Native cultural authenticity, but overall  “most  leftists  did  not  understand  that  their  adulation  and  reverence carried this darker undercurrent [of colonialism and racism].”28  Historian Paul Rosier  contends  that  the  mainstream  environmental  movement  developed  in tandem with an American Indian environmentalism during the 1960s and ’70s, sometimes intersecting in interesting ways (the Fish Wars is a good example, and literary examples include Ken Kesey’s blockbuster One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest and Edward Abbey’s 1975 cult classic The Monkey Wrench Gang). “An important element of this story,” Rosier writes, “is thus the conversation and collaboration  among  Indians  and  non-Indians  on  environmental  problems  in their efforts to find common ground; the process was an exchange of ideas and political   support   rather   than  a   one-way   act   of   appropriation  or   cultural imperialism.”29   But  as  the  years  progressed,  the  cultural  appropriation  and imperialism  intensified  with  the  rise  of  the  New  Age  movement,  and  the conversations and collaborations weren’t always smooth, or even present at all, when they should have been.

With the 1975 shift in federal policy to tribal self-determination and as tribal governments sought economic development, land use projects, land return, and cultural revitalization, clashes between tribes and white environmental groups were on the rise by the early 1980s, exposing the groups’historic roots in (white) settler  privilege  and  racism.  In  1983,  for  instance,  the  Nature  Conservancy purchased  four  hundred  acres  of  land  on  the  White  Earth  Reservation  and donated it back to the state of Minnesota, not the tribe.30 In 1985 the Sierra Club sued to prevent Tlingit and Haida in Alaska from logging on Admiralty Island, after the US had returned twenty-three thousand acres as part of a land claims settlement. In 1992 the Sierra Club refused to support the White Earth Land Recovery  Project’s  effort  to have  returned  the  northern  half  of  the  Tamarac Wildlife Refuge to the White Earth Band on the grounds that the club would not have a say in refuge management.31  In 1999, after years of legal, cultural, and spiritual groundwork, the Makah tribe in Washington State successfully hunted and killed their first gray whale in more than seventy years from a traditional cedar canoe. The reprisals were swift and furious, coming  from a variety  of antiwhaling and animal rights groups, the most vocal from the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society’s Paul Watson, a founding member of Greenpeace.32  The Makah received death threats, hate mail, public harassment, and the inevitable challenges to the authenticity of the tribe’s culture.
Conservationist  mythologies  of  Native  people  living  in  untouched  pristine nature have dogged them even into recent years. The Timbisha Shoshone in California’s Death Valley were dispossessed of their lands with the creation of Death  Valley  National  Monument  in  1933,  ending  the  tribe’s  ancient  land management when their homeland came under the management of the National Park Service. In 1983 the tribe gained federal recognition, but because federal recognition did not come with the return of land, it would take many more years of  legal  battles  to  finally  reacquire  7,754  acres  within  the  park,  under  the Timbisha   Homeland   Act.   Decades   of   landscape   neglect   resulted   in   the deterioration   of   the   honey   mesquite   and   single-leaf   piñon   groves—both important  food sources—and in 2000  the  Timbisha  requested comanagement with the Park Service to resume their traditional management practices, but they faced bitter opposition from numerous environmental groups and individuals, including the local Sierra Club chapter. In the public commenting process of a legislative environmental impact assessment, a dominant theme running through the comments was objection to tribal management. Public opposition was based on the tired, old belief of a pristine wilderness, as though the valley had been uninhabited and unmanaged for millennia. Eventually the conflict was resolved,

and  today  the  Timbisha  Shoshone  are  engaged  with  the  Park  Service  in experimental   projects   to   rehabilitate   the   natural   habitat   with   traditional techniques.33
Opposition to gaming has also been a platform upon which environmentalists have battled with tribes. I began my career as a journalist with one particularly ugly episode in 2003 in the Northern California community of Sonoma County. I chronicled an explosive controversy over plans of the Federated Indians of the Graton Rancheria (FIGR) to build a casino and hotel resort within its traditional territory of Rohnert Park, a town that was part of the county’s growing urban sprawl and where I happened to live. Sonoma County  and neighboring  Napa Valley are better known as California’s wine country, and tribal gaming had long been perceived as a corrupting influence in an otherwise politically liberal and expanding  economic  climate.  Prior  tribal  gaming  ventures  had  faced  bitter opposition and vitriolic fights. Initial promises not to pursue a gaming operation were made by tribal leaders under pressure from congressional members as a condition of the tribe’s federal recognition bill, which had passed only  three years earlier. But when the recognition bill passed without an antigaming clause, the tribal council changed its mind; well-funded gaming industry backers had courted them based on what was sure to be a lucrative location. Terminated in the 1950s and with widespread poverty in its community, the tribe had regained its  recognition  but  had  no  land  base.  The  project  would  first  require  the acquisition  of  land  that  would  then  be  taken  into  federal  trust,  making  it  a reservation. Once the site was chosen and the purchase initiated, the organized casino  opposition  kicked  into  high  gear,  becoming  a  spectacle  of  modern bipartisan anti-Indianism and invoking the ghosts of California’s not-so-distant genocidal past. Like the Makah, the tribe faced death threats and public hate speech, inaccurate and unfair media representation, and vicious racist attacks. And it went on for years.
Lawsuits failed to stop the project. The conflict raised issues of the tribe’s sovereignty, its right to economic development, and the historical injustices it had faced on one hand, and on the other, an ideologically driven disapproval of gaming by a surprisingly large and diverse segment of the local population. The result was a toxic brew of highly public and far-reaching anti-Indian rhetoric. After a 360-acre parcel of farmland had been purchased and the land taken into trust in 2010, the opposition group Stop the Casino 101 Coalition tried numerous tactics  to  block  construction,  including  appeals  to  environmental  harm.  The Center for Biological Diversity was brought in and determined that the habitat of the endangered tiger salamander would be affected. Adding fuel to an already raging  political  conflagration,  public  debates  then  centered  on  the  need  to

balance  economic  development  (not  tribal  sovereignty)  with  environmental protection.  Efforts  to  stop  the  project  based  on  the  endangered  salamander ultimately failed, however, and the casino opened in 2013. The highly divisive public battle led all the way to the US Supreme Court, with the court declining to hear  the  case  in  2015.  In  the  end,  challenges  based  on  salamander  habitat resulted  in  the  US  Fish  and  Wildlife  Service’s  designation  of  a  47,383-acre salamander protection zone, an exemption of 252 acres of FIGR’s property from the   zone,34	and   the   tribe   setting   aside   180   acres   and   $24   million   for environmental mitigation projects.
Legal strategies aimed at protecting the salamander may have failed to stop the project, but it raised troubling and provocative questions about what it means for non-Indians to use environmental issues as a political wedge against tribes’ right to exercise sovereignty, especially if seen through a lens that recognizes settler colonialism as an ongoing process of environmental injustice. If settler colonialism is a structure that disrupts Indigenous peoples’ relationships to their environments (as clearly happened to FIGR) and the exercise of sovereignty is at least a partial effort to reverse that structure, then opposition to it would be read as favoring a system that continues to commit environmental injustice against Indigenous peoples. It also highlights why environmental injustice is an issue that for Indigenous peoples goes beyond environmental racism. To what degree is environmentalism deployed as just another weapon of colonial domination in unpopular  tribal  economic  development  projects?  Connecting  the  issue  more broadly to ethical land use in energy projects, how can environmental awareness and  protection  be  balanced  with  histories  of  injustice  and  respect  for  tribal sovereignty?   If   environmentalists   (and   the   broader   public)   were   more knowledgeable about tribal histories, sovereignty, and colonialism, could they transcend  narratives  that  reduce  debates  about  tribal  economic  development projects   to   environment   versus   development   or   in   the   case   of   gaming, communities  versus  tribal  gaming?  Finally,  how  can  education  about  settler privilege,  white  supremacy,  and  systemic  racism  improve  relations  between Indian   and   non-Indian   activist   communities   and   the   broader   American population overall?


WORKING TOWARD PRODUC TIVE PARTNERSHIPS
A  milestone  in  the  environmental  movement  occurred  in  1992  with  the convening of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, also known as the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit. The Rio Summit was, among other things, the world’s governments formal acknowledgment of climate change

and   resulted   in   several   binding   agreements,   including   the   Framework Convention   on   Climate   Change.   By   then,   Indigenous   peoples   had   been organizing around environmental issues at the international level since at least 1972,  when  a  delegation  of  Hopi  and  Navajo  activists  attended  the  United Nations  Conference  on  the  Human  Environment  in  Stockholm,  the  United Nation’s  first  major  international  conference  on  the  environment.35   Climate change agreements like the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Accords eventually followed, and by 2000 a robust climate justice movement was mobilized. On a large  scale,  climate  change  activism  married the  environmental  movement— which  had  morphed  into  one  wing  of  an  international  nonprofit  industrial complex—with grassroots activism. It signaled that environmental justice was a global but distinct aspect of the environmental movement, since the detrimental effects  of  climate  change  were  unevenly  distributed  between  the  so-called developed and undeveloped worlds. Whereas the environmental movement writ large was concerned with the myriad ways humans were causing environmental degradation, climate change, caused by greenhouse gases produced primarily by burning  fossil  fuels,  pinpointed  the  blame  on  Big  Oil  and  its  far  too  cozy relationship with governments. But Indigenous and fourth world people were on the frontlines of climate change, as people living in closer relationships to the Earth felt its impacts first: loss of land due to sea level rise, desertification, drought, disruptions to subsistence-based food systems, intensifying storms, loss of sea ice, and a host of related ecosystem changes. Yet they had been largely excluded  from  United  Nations  climate  change  talks,  and  worse,  the  Kyoto Protocol’s  creation  of  a  market-based  system  of  carbon  trading   exposed Indigenous peoples to new abuses by States. It was thus natural that Indigenous peoples would rise as global leaders of the climate justice movement.
During   the  1990s  new  kinds  of  stories  began  to  appear  in  American environmental  literature  and  media,  conceding  the  ways  the  environmental movement  had  marginalized  and  alienated  Native  peoples.  New  alliances between tribal nations and people with whom they had historical enmities (not just  environmental  groups)  increasingly  formed  to  oppose  environmentally destructive development. Indigenous environmental groups sprang up, like the Indigenous Environmental Network (1990), Honor the Earth (1993), and other locally based tribal and non-Native coalitions, such as the Shundahai Network (a Shoshone effort to resist the Nevada Nuclear Test Site), the Environmentally Concerned  Citizens  of  Lakeland  Areas  (Lac  du  Flambeau  Ojibwe  citizens’ opposition  to  a   sulfide   mine   in  Wisconsin),   Sweetgrass   Hills   Protective Association (multiple tribes  aligned with non-Natives to fight a gold mining operation in northern Montana), to name just a few. In the second decade of the

twenty-first century, with the oil industry  posting  record profits, proliferating fracking   operations,36	and   massive   new   pipelines   planned—exacerbating tensions  created by  the  2008 recession and skyrocketing  wealth inequality— public fury grew. By 2015, high-profile demonstrations succeeded in convincing the Obama administration to reject the Keystone XL Pipeline, uniting Native and non-Native people in mounting demands to transition away from a fossil fuel economy. By  April 2016, when a handful of Lakota women and youth were quietly setting up the Sacred Stone Camp to protest the Dakota Access Pipeline, a critical mass had been reached and the ground laid for what would become the biggest tribally led act of civil disobedience in US history.
The #NoDAPL protest at Standing Rock was precedent setting on numerous fronts, not the least of which for the degree of collaboration between Native and non-Native  people  it  inspired.  For  the  better  part  of  a  year,  non–Native Americans poured out their support in social and news media, with financial and other donations of everything from food and clothing to building materials, and side by side risked their lives with Indian people, braving brutal police attacks, harassment, and jail. Thousands of non-Native veterans put their bodies on the line in life-threatening weather conditions, and led by Wesley Clark Jr., son of the retired army general and Democratic presidential candidate Wesley Clark Sr., they  publicly  asked  forgiveness  for  centuries  of  military  aggression  against Indian people. More than a few stars showed up, lending their celebrity to draw attention to the Standing Rock tribe’s cause. After hundreds of years of hostility between Native and non-Native people, the cooperation between them at Oceti Sakowin seemed to suggest a new level of conciliation for at least some segment of the population. Yet even in light of this heightened spirit of cooperation and goodwill, underlying tensions bubbled to the surface in old, familiar ways, as we explore in the following  chapter. It found a particular expression among  the women, which might not be surprising, given it was women who established the camps and were largely in charge to begin with. This gendered cultural clash opens a space to examine in detail how things can so easily go wrong between Native and non-Native activists when entrenched patterns of white supremacy and racism are unconsciously repeated, maintaining obstacles to true partnership and respect.




C H A P T E R    S I X




Hearts Not on the Ground

Indigenous Women’s Leadership and More Cultural Clashes

A nation is not defeated until the hearts of its women are on the ground.

—OLD INDIAN PROVERB

Ladonna Brave Bull Allard, a Standing Rock Sioux tribal historian and founder of the Sacred Stone Camp, stands on a grassy green knoll looking out over Lake Oahe, wistfully reflecting on the past. The North Dakota prairie wind blows her thick salt-and-pepper hair away from her face, accentuating her elegant Indian grandma features. She tells the story of how her great-great grandmother Nape Hote Win (Mary Big Moccasin) survived the Whitestone Massacre in 1863, and about a time before the dam when the Missouri River was called Wakangapi Wakpa, River that Makes the Sacred Stones, for a large whirlpool that created large, spherical sandstone formations. The lake claimed those sacred stones, and it was for them that Allard named her place the Camp of the Sacred Stones. “I was a girl when the floods came and desecrated our burial sites and Sun Dance grounds. Our people are in that water. This river holds the story of my  life,” hinting at the bittersweetness of the lake, at once a giver and taker of life.1 This is the way  it has always been done throughout Indian country, elders telling stories that keep the memories of their people alive—the ancestors and their enemies,  life  and  death,  good  and  bad.  Women  have  always  been  valued storytellers in their communities, keepers of culture and defenders of their lands, alongside and equal to but different from men, often sharing political power and leadership  roles.  It  is  the  same  today,  but  not  without  alteration,  loss,  and reclamation.
Examining the history of Native women’s political activism provides context for understanding how the Standing Rock resistance camps came to be and lays the  groundwork  for  a  discussion  on  how  activists  and  scholars  talk  about Indigenous  feminist  theory,  demonstrating  the  important  roles  women  have always  played in American Indian communities  and the  United States  more

broadly. This then opens a space to discuss the ways in which conflict entered the camps in some of the ways discussed in the previous chapter, but also in particularly gendered ways among women, revealing the cultural differences and unspoken assumptions that often still interfere with non-Native activists’ ability to be respectful, effective allies and accomplices. These are critical ruptures that shouldn’t  be  overlooked so that  we  can “all  just  get  along.”  An unflinching assessment can help well-meaning non-Native allies break down the systemic barriers  of  colonially  based  racism  that  still  construct  relationships  between Indians and non-Indians, build more constructive partnerships, and eviscerate the destructive patterns of white supremacy and saviorism.


THE INDIGENOUS ROOTS OF MODERN FEMINISM
Long before there was ever a concept called “feminism” in the US settler State, there was the knowledge of women’s power in Indigenous communities. The imposition of foreign cultures, and Christianity in particular, was corrosive to societies  that  were  typically  matrilineal  or  matrifocal,  were  foundationally equitable in the distribution of power between the genders, and often respected the  existence  of  a  third gender  and non-hetero relationships.  As  Christianity swept over the continent, it instilled Indigenous societies with patriarchal values that sought not only  to diminish women’s inherent cultural power but also to pathologize alternative gender identities, relationships, and marriage practices outside the bounds of monogamy, establishing a general pattern of gender and relationship suppression that constructs modern American society and reordered Native societies.
Feminism as we know it today is a concept that emerged primarily from the experience of white settler women in the mid-nineteenth century. Historically, European women were little more than the property of men and did not have the same political rights as men did, such as the right to vote or own property. Once they  were  married  they  had  no  rights  to  their  own  bodies  or  even  to  their children, amounting  to no legal existence, as feminist historian Sally  Roesch Wagner recounts. So it was logical that their struggles focused on the ability to achieve equality, which would mean, among  other things, legal standing  and rights. Less well recognized today is the way early women’s rights activists were shaped  by  American  Indians.  Studying  the  writings  of  some  of  the  earliest recognized founders of the feminist movement, such as Lucretia Mott, Elizabeth Cady  Stanton, and Matilda Joselyn Gage, Wagner noted the ways they  were influenced   by   Haudenosaunee   (Iroquois)   cultures   with   whom   they   were neighbors in the Northeast. These settler women observed that Haudenosaunee

women were  free  from  constrictive,  torturous  clothing,  were  farmers,  played sports, owned property, and were free from rape and other violence. They were not the property of men. Haudenosaunee women were highly respected in their societies,  and a  Clan Mother  society  guided much of  the  governance  of  the Haudenosaunee   Six   Nations   Confederacy   (Mohawk,   Oneida,   Onondaga, Cayuga, Seneca, and Tuscarora) by choosing and overseeing the male chiefs. In Haudenosaunee society, children’s identity was inherited through the mother’s clan (compared to Western societies, which trace identity patrilineally), making the concept of illegitimate children completely foreign. This meant that women had far more control over their bodies than did their white counterparts. While there were norms that governed Haudenosaunee life, women’s sexuality was not policed and condemned the way white women’s was.2
White women, in other words, were fighting for the social equity that most Native women traditionally enjoyed in their societies. The work of white women activists in the nineteenth century, often referred to as “first-wave feminism,” gradually bore fruit, and by 1920 white women had won the right to vote. But paradoxically, while white women were gaining rights, Native women’s rights were  still  being  eroded through centuries  of  forced assimilation into the  US political landscape. The bestowal of citizenship upon American Indians in 1924, for example, was (and still is to an extent) controversial in Indian country. For the federal government, citizenship was a strategy of assimilation, but it was also advocated  by  the  Society  of  American  Indians,  the  first  Indian-run  rights organization, which was in existence from 1911 to 1923. Citizenship was one of SAI’s  primary  agenda  issues  and  was  viewed  as  a  mechanism  to  advance Indians’status beyond “wards of the government” and a “fight for a place as full, modern, and dynamic participants in American life.”3 But as Wagner also points out, many Haudenosaunee women opposed citizenship because it would subject Native women to the same legal system that continued to oppress white women even after suffrage.4


NATIVE WOMEN’S AC TIVISM IS BORN
The mid-twentieth century brought with it intense social unrest as traditionally marginalized communities fought to end oppressive policies like segregation and combat   poverty   borne   of   their   marginalization.   The   women’s   liberation movement,  firmly  rooted  in  the  white  middle  class  and  now  referred  to  as “second-wave  feminism,”  pressed  forward  with  demands  for  equality,  which would ideally be solidified into an Equal Rights Amendment to the constitution and was first unsuccessfully proposed in 1923. A renewed movement to pass the

ERA in the 1970s failed in large part due to obstacles imposed by conservative women.  In  the  meantime,  as  the  feminist  and  ethnic  nationalist  movements advanced through the 1970s and beyond, women of color activists and scholars articulated differences between their struggles and those of middle-class white women.  Their  struggles,  they  said,  were  inseparable  from  their  particular histories  of  racial  and colonial  oppression.  Not  all  American Indian women, however, agreed that feminism was an appropriate framework, claiming that it opposed traditional practices and forms of social organization. Many of today’s Native feminists counter the claims that feminism was inappropriate, however, and argue for an Indigenous conception of feminism, which recognizes their cultural  diversity  and  that  what  they  do  share  is  their  histories  of  colonial domination. In the words of Native feminist scholars Shari Huhndorf and Cheryl Suzack,  an  Indigenous  feminism  “centers  on  the  fact  that  the  imposition  of patriarchy  has  transformed  Indigenous  societies  by  diminishing  Indigenous women’s power, status, and material circumstances.”5 Patriarchy, in other words, is inseparable from colonialism.
Indigenous  feminism  foregrounds  Indigenous  relationships  to  place  and dominant society, which on a global scale vary from country to country. In the US   this   is   articulated  in  the   language   of   tribal   sovereignty   and  Native nationhood. This wave of modern rights-based American Indian activism began with SAI, a collection of Western-educated Indian professionals who embraced the  Progressive  Era  values  of  reform  that  tended  to  believe  education  and government action were key to improving Indian lives. Their work influenced what  led  to  positive  change  in  federal  Indian  policy  in  the  1930s  with  the passage of the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934. It was progressive for its goals to promote self-determination, but also for the way Native women worked side by side with Native men at a time when white women were still barred from many leadership organizations.
The women of SAI are remembered to this day for their bold leadership and fearless voices. There are many noteworthy examples, but a few women stand out as significant players. One of SAI’s founding members was Laura Cornelius Kellogg  of  the  Wisconsin  Oneida  tribe.  She  was  widely  traveled  and  well educated and taught at two Indian boarding schools. As a public intellectual she was known for her visionary ideas to transform the Indian Service (also known as  Office  of  Indian  Affairs,  predecessor  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs), advocacy  for  preserving  traditional  Native  knowledge,  and  fighting  for  land rights of her tribe and others in Southern California. The Los Angeles Times in 1904 described Kellogg as “one of the most interesting Indian women in the

United States.” 6
Marie  Louise  Bottineau  Baldwin,  Turtle  Mountain  Ojibway,  was  the  first American Indian woman to become an attorney. At a time of extreme pressure for Indian people to assimilate into white society and when women were fighting for  the  vote,  Baldwin—a  respected  employee  of  the  Indian  Service—was publicly  outspoken  on  the  equity  built  into  Native  cultures  and  “went  even further, claiming the cultural superiority of Native societies, especially in terms of the position of women.”7  Her strong Indigenous feminist stance was highly influential on mainstream suffragists when she participated in a suffrage parade the weekend of President Woodrow Wilson’s inauguration.
Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, also known by her Lakota name Zitkála-Šá, is one of the most widely written about women of SAI. Bonnin was a multitalented Native renaissance woman who wrote several books and was an accomplished musician (she wrote the first Native American opera, The Sundance Opera), teacher, editor, and political activist. Perhaps her greatest influence during the Progressive  Era  came  through  her  leadership  in  the  National  Council  of American Indians. Formed after the dissolution of SAI in 1923, Bonnin was chosen as president and remained in that post until the end of her life in 1938.
SAI suffered from internal disharmony among its members, even those who had previously been friends, like Gertrude Bonnin and Marie Bottineau. Conflict stemmed from differences in views on the ritual use of peyote in a new religious movement that was sweeping through reservation communities (now known as the Native American Church) and from distrust of the Indian Service, where many of SAI’s members worked. American Indians’ formal organizing followed a trajectory from SAI to the National Council of American Indians, formed in 1924 under Bonnin’s leadership, to the emergence of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) in 1944, which was the beginning of the notorious termination  era.  NCAI  was  (and  still  is)  a  forum  for  tribal  leaders  to  work together on solving problems in Indian country that stemmed from the violation of tribes’ treaty rights. Their approach was to lobby lawmakers and use other “official” channels to assert and strengthen tribal rights. But something else was brewing in the streets of big cities where Indians had been sent on a relocation work  program,  especially  in  Minneapolis  and  San  Francisco.  In  1968  in Minneapolis,  police  brutality  against  Indians  inspired  a  grassroots  response, giving birth to the American Indian Movement (AIM) under the male leadership of Dennis Banks, Russell Means, Vernon and Clyde Bellecourt, and others. The following year, college students in the San Francisco Bay Area hatched a plan to reclaim the defunct prison island of Alcatraz and turn it into an American Indian

cultural  center.  The  Alcatraz  Island occupation lasted a  year  and a  half  and became  a  flashpoint  for  AIM,  beginning  a  series  of  other  actions  that  were considered militant  by  the  mainstream  press  and federal  government.  It  was followed by the Trail of Broken Treaties and the occupation of the BIA building in Washington, DC, in 1972, and the seventy-one-day standoff at Wounded Knee in 1973.
Referred to as the Red Power movement, the activism of the 1960s and ’70s was cultivated largely by young urban Indians, and while women were involved, it was visibly dominated by men who had become so acculturated to dominant white  society  they  had  limited  knowledge  of  their  tribes’  matrilineal  and matriarchal  cultures.8   This  translated  into  sexist,  repressive  behavior  toward women. One of the most profoundly  destabilizing  aspects of colonization on Native  life  has  been  in  the  relationships  between  men  and  women.  This “patriarchal colonialism”9  is particularly applicable to the 1960s and ’70s and led to a new generation of Native women’s organizing.10  By 1974 some of the AIM  women  came  together  and  formed  the  Women  of  All  Red  Nations (WARN).  Lorelei  De  Cora  Means,  Phyllis  Young,  Janet  McCloud,  Madonna Thunderhawk, and others organized WARN based on earlier concepts of tribal women’s   traditions.   Some   of   these   women  are   still   involved  in  activist organizing; Phyllis Young was instrumental from the beginning of the Standing Rock resistance as a council member who was present and very outspoken in SRST’s   meeting   with  Energy   Transfer   Partners   in  September   2014,   and Madonna Thunderhawk was at Oceti Sakowin for much if not all of its duration.
WARN formed initially as a response to the extensive arrests of Native men after  the  Wounded  Knee  occupation.  But  the  group  quickly  advanced  its objective, focusing on Native women’s health issues, especially exposing that the  federal  government  had  forcibly  sterilized  thousands  of  Indian  women without their knowledge. During the occupation of the BIA building in 1972, WARN  members  seized  secret  files  documenting  the  sterilizations  at  Indian Health  Service  facilities.  In  a  1974  WARN  study   stemming   from  those documents, the group contended that as many as 42 percent of Native women of reproductive  age  had  been  unknowingly  sterilized  in  an  official  government eugenics program that targeted poor and other women of color.11  The WARN study slightly predated a 1975 study by the General Accounting Office, under the direction of South Dakota senator James Abourezk, that confirmed much of WARN’s data and led to several lawsuits and the reform of the Indian Health Service’s  reproductive  health-care  practices.  Both  the  WARN  study  and  the GAO  report  coincided  with  other  research  findings,  exposing  a  pattern  that

between 25 and 35 percent  of  all  Indian children were  being  removed from Indian  homes  and  placed  in  foster  care,  adoption,  or  other  institutions.  The studies’ findings led to the passage of the Indian Child Welfare Act in 1978.12 It seems important to note that in the larger context of American history, forced sterilizations and removal of Indian children clearly  fit within the pattern of structural genocide identified in chapter 2. As WARN evolved, it incorporated other issues pertinent to American Indian women’s health, notably the effects of Black Hills uranium extraction on the Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota, which was causing miscarriages, birth defects, and various forms of cancer.
Women of All Red Nations became a launching pad for other Native women’s organizing  and was  initially  connected to organizing  on the  tribal  level.  For example, some of the WARN women were involved in the leadership of the Oglala Sioux  Civil Rights Organization (OSCRO) of the early  1970s. On the Pine Ridge reservation, the OSCRO was formed in response to the reactionary tribal government led by chairman Dick Wilson, who was widely perceived to be a puppet of the US government. Under Wilson’s direction, the notorious GOON (guardians  of  the  Oglala  Nation)  squad,  carried  out  a  campaign  of  violent intimidation against AIM activists and other traditionalists working to reform their   government.   Other   women’s   organizations   sprang   up,   such   as   the Northwest Indian Women’s Circle, founded in 1981 by WARN’s Janet McCloud, and the Indigenous Women’s Network (IWN) in 1985.13
The Indigenous social movements of the 1960s and ’70s continued to build upon and overlap with each other, because all the issues facing American Indians were  interconnected—the  result  of  their  history  of  colonization  and  modern forms  of  colonial  exploitation  and  abuse.  A good  example  is  how  WARN’s exposing  of  uranium  poisoning  linked  Native  women’s  reproductive  health problems   to   environmental   contamination.   Environmental   contamination, especially  related to uranium,  was  not  a  new  issue  in Indian country  in the 1970s.  As  we  have  seen,  in  the  Southwest  on  and  near  the  Navajo Nation, uranium mining had been going on since the late 1930s, and by the 1970s its deadly health effects were well known, reaching a catastrophic crescendo with the Rio Puerco spill in 1979. But what was new was the way WARN linked this long-recognized issue to reproductive health.
Native women’s activism was always distinctly connected to environmental activism in order to protect communities from toxic development and was part of a larger pattern of organizing that led to the international arena. The International Indian  Treaty  Council,  for  example,  was  not  a  women’s  organization,  but American Indian women played significant roles throughout its history and IITC

became the first Indigenous entity to achieve United Nations nongovernmental organization status in 1977. Andrea Carmen joined the staff of IITC in 1983, and since   1992   she   has   been   the   organization’s   executive   director.   On   the international  scene  another  visible  shift  began  to  occur  with  the  rise  of  the climate justice movement. Indigenous peoples worldwide became more visible as  it  became  apparent  that  they,  along  with  more  vulnerable  peoples  in  the undeveloped, Indigenous, and fourth world, were on the frontlines of climate change, even though they had been excluded from international processes like the  Kyoto  Protocol.  Grassroots  movements  and  organizations  emerged  from Indigenous  communities  all  over  the  world,  bringing  attention to the  effects climate change, the fossil fuel industry, and government collusion were having on their communities. And women were conspicuously at the forefront of those movements and organizations.  With the  rise of the  internet, mass  organizing became  infinitely  easier,  enabling  people  to connect  across  international  and cultural lines. For instance, in 2004 a group of thirteen international Indigenous women came together from communities as diverse as the Dakotas, the Alaskan Tundra, Oaxaca, Tibet, and Nepal to form an “alliance of prayer, education and healing for our Mother Earth, all Her inhabitants, all the children, and for the next seven generations to come.”14  Calling themselves the Council of Thirteen Indigenous Grandmothers, the council held gatherings every  year for thirteen years in the home territory of each member.
In 2012 Indigenous women’s organizing  vaulted into mainstream visibility when  four  mostly  First  Nations  women  came  together  to  oppose  a  suite  of proposed Canadian laws that were seen as a threat to the environment and a simultaneous assault on Native rights.15  Primarily through the vehicle of social media, they  vowed to be “idle no more,” and a new Indigenous women–led environmental rights movement was born. Spreading like wildfire, the Idle No More movement was international within weeks, especially taking hold in the US.  The  movement  failed to stop the  legislation it  formed to oppose,  but  it galvanized the attention of Canadians and Americans, awakening many to the ways  the  struggles  of  Indigenous  peoples  fighting  toxic  development  were everybody’s struggles, not just Indigenous peoples’.
In 2013 women were once again out front with the Summer Heat campaign, organized  by  Winona  LaDuke,  Naomi  Klein,  and  Bill  McKibben.  It  was  a coordinated effort to bring people out into the streets to oppose the fossil fuel industry. San Francisco’s Idle No More group mobilized more than two thousand people on the first anniversary of a massive explosion at a Richmond refinery that sent fifteen thousand people to the hospital. It was led by Pennie Opal Plant

of mixed Yaqui, Cherokee, and Choctaw heritage. Idle No More groups continue to work within Canada and beyond to stem the tide of fossil fuel development.
Meanwhile,   fueling   the   climate   justice   movement   was   disturbing   new information   that   the   greenhouse   gases   (GHG)   in   the   atmosphere   were accumulating   faster   than   scientists   previously	predicted.   The   scientific community  has long maintained that to prevent global catastrophic scenarios, global warming must remain under two degrees Celsius. But in 2012 the United Nations Environmental Program released a report claiming that GHG emissions were approximately 14 percent higher than what would be required by the end of the decade to limit warming to two degrees.16 Then in 2013, the concentration of GHGs had surpassed the critical threshold of four hundred parts per million, representing a 41 percent increase caused by humans.17 On the heels of Idle No More, another group of North American Indigenous women (some of the same organizers of the San Francisco Idle No More group) came together to create the Indigenous  Women  of  the  Americas—Defenders  of  Mother  Earth  Treaty  in 2015. The treaty acknowledges natural laws of Mother Earth and Father Sky, and that the “laws have been violated to such an extreme degree that the sacred system  of  life  is  now  threatened and does  not  have  the  capacity  for  life  to continue  safely  in the  way  in which it  has  existed for  millions  of  years.”18 Reflecting a growing sense of collective urgency, it calls for all women of the Earth (1) to nonviolently rise up and work to influence government leaders and those in seats of power to adapt human-made laws in accordance with natural laws in a spirit of love, and (2) to conduct prayer ceremonies on each new moon and every solstice and equinox.
The treaty  links the violence done to the Earth with the violence done to women, naming the crisis of missing, murdered, raped, and enslaved women in Indigenous communities worldwide. Because of the activism of First Nations women in Canada and the country’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the decades-old problem has become more visible in recent years. In 2012 Canadian statistics indicated that Indigenous women represented 16 percent of all female homicides  between  1980  and  2012  despite  being   only   4  percent  of  the population; a 2014 report from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police counted a total of 1,181 murdered and missing Indigenous women and girls, 164 missing and 1,107 murdered in that thirty-two-year span. The government of Canada launched  a   national   inquiry   into  the   problem   of   missing   and  murdered Indigenous women in 2016.19 The problem is mirrored in the United States with numerous studies confirming that American Indian women experience rates of sexual and domestic violence far higher than all other demographic groups. A

2016  Department  of  Justice  study  indicated that  more  than four  in five  (84 percent) American Indian and Alaska Native women experienced violence in their  lifetimes;  56  percent  experienced sexual  violence,  and 55  percent  have experienced physical violence by an intimate partner.20 According to the DOJ’s website,  American  Indian  women  are  two  and  a  half  times  more  likely  to experience sexual assault crimes compared to all other races.21  Globally, the problem  of  human  sex  trafficking  in  Indigenous  communities  came  to  the forefront with the 2014 genocide of Yezidi people in Iraq. At the hands of the Islamic State (ISIS), thousands of Yezidi men were massacred, and more than three  thousand  women  were  kidnapped  and  swept  into  a  system  of  modern slavery.


C ULTURAL C LASHES AT STANDING ROC K
Against the backdrop of the countless seen and unseen actions by Indigenous women working for the protection of their communities and future generations, a critical mass seemed to have been reached, making the #NoDAPL demonstration at  Standing  Rock  possible.  Massive  global  resistance  to Big  Oil,  decades  of political  organizing  by  Native  people,  networking  across  multiple  spheres  of interest, and sophisticated use of social media all account for the groundswell that made the Standing Rock convergence possible. It was stunning not only for the sheer scope of support it received but also for the way it brought together a diverse array of people from the farthest reaches of the globe. Aside from the dangerous   encounters   with   a   militarized   police   force   and   pro-pipeline propaganda, Oceti Sakowin seemed to be a well-oiled machine. Human-interest news stories emphasized harmonious teamwork in feeding the growing crowds and the daily chores of managing a village-size camp out on an isolated prairie. Medics expertly handled injuries inflicted by police weapons, mace, and dogs. Lawyers staffed the legal tent and helped prepare defenses for the hundreds of those arrested. On “Facebook hill,” the only spot in the camp with a reasonably good cell signal, a stationary  bicycle generated enough electricity  to recharge phones as long as someone was pedaling. The hill became the place for press conferences and social media updates that kept the world informed on a daily basis. In general people were well behaved.
But something else was lurking just underneath the surface, a familiar tension that surfaced in a particularly gendered way. It was reminiscent of the roadblocks that have plagued relationships between environmentalists and Native people in the past, only  this time it manifested in a particular way  among  the women. About the time the friction became public, I had been asked to participate in a

conference panel on the topic of Indigenous feminist issues. Intrigued by what was playing out on the ground at Standing Rock, I decided that I would make a closer study of the conflict in order to understand the underlying dynamics as the topic for my conference presentation. At the same time, I had also been working as a freelance journalist writing for Indian Country Media Network and writing about Standing  Rock  from a distance. Like thousands of other people, I felt compelled to go there, but a busy work and travel schedule made it difficult.
For weeks I had been glued to the many live Facebook feeds coming out of Oceti Sakowin. I’d been watching the evening of November 21 when the water cannon attacks in the subfreezing nighttime temperatures unfolded. That was the moment I decided the time had come to go, and I found an opening  in my schedule to make the trip. Traveling with a couple of friends—a brilliant young Kul  Wicasa  doctoral  student  named  Nick  Estes,  who  had  become  a  trusted advisor to his relatives who were the headmen at Oceti Sakowin, and Carolina Ramos, who was going to donate her lawyer skills—we left Southern California on  Thanksgiving  Day,  unavoidably  driving  east  into  a  snowstorm.  After  a harrowing drive in near-blizzard conditions and a road closure that forced us to sleep in the car in the parking lot of a truck stop in Rock Springs, Wyoming, we finally made it to Oceti Sakowin after thirty-six hours in the car.
I was at Standing Rock for just a few days. Thanksgiving weekend was when the   population   swelled   to   its   largest   numbers—some   estimating   thirteen thousand people or more. It’s impossible to say when the ratio of Native to non-Native people shifted, but by  that weekend it was clear that non-Natives far outweighed  the  Native  population.  What  I  was  most  struck   by   was  my perception that despite that more non-Native than Native people were in the camp, it was nonetheless a space dominated by  Native people. The rules for engagement were based on Lakota protocol, and everything was conducted in ceremonial fashion. It was peaceful and focused. Oceti Sakowin was, in other words, Indigenous, culturally sovereign space. The community at the Standing Rock  camps  was,  however,  far  from  an  Indigenous  cultural  utopia.  By  all accounts, things were less complicated when the camps were still populated with a majority  of Native people. When the violence started in September, people began pouring into the camps from all over the United States and the world, and the  population  demographic  began  shifting.  Standing  Rock  had  become  a lightning rod and symbol of global resistance against fossil fuel development.
While there was cooperation and people chipping in with the heavy work of chopping  wood, sorting  out donations, cooking, structure building, and other chores of managing a large semipermanent encampment, in my conversations I also  heard   dissatisfaction   with   the   way   things   were   going.   There   were

complaints from the Native folks that the non-Native people were treating their visit more like it was a music festival than a site of serious political resistance. There were accounts of drug and alcohol use, which was strictly prohibited, and other  transgressions  that  signaled  violations  of  Indigenous  protocol  in  what appeared to me as a cultural conflict in which dominant European American values were consciously or unconsciously in competition with Lakota values. I first  became  interested  in  how  the  differences  were  playing  out  among  the women  months  earlier,  in  September  when  a  controversy  arose  about  how women were expected to dress in camp. According  to Lakota tradition, in a ceremonial context, women are expected to wear long skirts. This is also true in other tribal contexts—it is common throughout Indian country—and different tribal people have different ways of expressing what wearing skirts means, but for all tribal cultures it is, if nothing else, a simple matter of respect.
There  were  murmurings  of  some  of  the  non-Native  women  objecting  to wearing  skirts. After all, from their perspective, wearing  skirts in a camping environment seemed impractical. Not surprising, most seemed not to have been aware of the protocol and arrived at the camps without the appropriate attire. It became such an issue that Native women organized sewing brigades to make skirts  for  the  women  who  were  without  them.  Well-known  Native  clothing designer Bethany Yellowtail, for example, came from Los Angeles armed with two hundred yards of cloth and other sewing materials to contribute to the skirt-making  effort.  The  skirt  issue  is  relevant  because  it  is  emblematic  of  the differences in worldview across not just cultural but also gendered lines. In this instance, for non-Native women, wearing skirts might seem not just impractical but  also  oppressive,  perhaps  invoking  a  time  when  women  were  socially required to dress  in certain ways,  a  history  they  fought  hard to change.  For Native women on the other hand, wearing skirts is a way of honoring tradition and expressing identity and cultural pride.
Indigenous social ethics and Native peoples’ authentic connection to land are what historically has drawn white settlers to emulate Native American cultures in myriad problematic and convoluted ways, even while they  were trying  to exterminate  Native  people.  In  local  histories  they  also  write  Indians  out  of landscapes as extinct or somehow disappeared and relate histories of themselves as original to place in “replacement narratives.”22  In these ways white people unconsciously	and   often   consciously	enact	the	conditioning	that	has mythologized their superiority, even while they venerate the values that shape Native  societies.  To explain it,  psychologists  have  applied the  framework  of critical  race  psychology  to  account  for  ways  the  centering  of  whiteness  in dominant  society   manifests  in  narratives  of  neoliberal  individualism  and,

borrowing from critical social theory, in “possessive investments in whiteness” to describe how racism is reproduced on individual and institutional levels.23 Simply stated, possessive investment in whiteness refers to an American social structure whose default reference point is white and middle class, a system that benefits primarily white people.24
In  social  movements,  this  dynamic  can  result  in  troubled  relationships between  affinity   activist  groups;  we  have  seen  how  it  plays  out  in  the environmental movement in particular, and how relationships between Native and non-Native  people  go sideways.  These  are  invisible,  unspoken,  typically unrecognized, but always-present assumptions about white cultural superiority that  structure  society  at  every  level.  I’m  arguing  it’s  why  the  disharmony between Native and non-Native men and women manifested at Standing Rock, even   in   culturally   sovereign   Indigenous   space,   and   by   extension,   why relationships go wrong in the broader environmental movement.
To further understand these dynamics, I sought to gather stories of individual women and men who were willing to go on record with their experiences. In these interviews (which were conducted predominantly with women) my goal was to understand how their experiences exemplified, or conversely concealed, the cultural differences between Native and non-Native people, and women in particular. The interviews produced stories that not surprisingly reflected a range of  experiences  and  viewpoints.  The  difference  in  worldview  is  especially poignant in the example of two particular interviewees, one whom I’ll refer to as Sue and another I’ll call Darcy (both pseudonyms). Sue is a Native journalist who traveled back and forth between her home community and Standing Rock numerous  times  and wrote  many  stories  for  Native  American media.  She  is solidly grounded in a Native identity and grew up in a reservation community. Sue  recounted  several  instances  where  Native  and  non-Native  worldviews collided.  She  commented that  “the  topic  of  the  skirts  took  on rich meaning because it symbolized so many different things,” especially relative to prayerful resistance and Native identity. She spoke at length about what she called the “hippie” or “rainbow” people, whom she characterized as “New Agey,” and she witnessed several events where “rainbow women” overstepped boundaries of Indigenous protocol in a number of ways.
One example of boundary crossing occurred in October. In August a series of two  women’s  meetings  had  been  held,  led  by  esteemed  Lakota  elder  Faith Spotted Eagle, who delivered teachings about traditional women’s knowledge, including perspectives on skirts and the need to understand patriarchy and how it has  affected Native  communities.  A few  weeks  later,  in October,  a  call  was

announced from the central fire (Oceti Sakowin’s central gathering place) for another  women’s  meeting.  Thinking  this  was  another  meeting  with  Spotted Eagle, Sue went to the meeting only to find it being run by a white woman. She described  the  woman  having  a  “New  Agey  staff”  that  was  being  used  as  a talking stick (a communication implement Native people often use to regulate meetings), with children’s handprints all over it. Not a style of talking stick that can be identified as “traditional,” Sue recounted feeling uncomfortable about the staff,  not  sure  if  the  children’s  parents  had  given  permission  for  what  she believed  was  an  exploitation  of  the  children.  Only  about  ten  women  were present, mostly non-Native, but one was a Native woman who appeared to have been brought to the meeting by the white woman and who spoke in disrespectful and  vulgar  ways.  Sue  saw  the  Native  woman  as  a  “token  Indian,”  there  to “legitimize  her  [the  white  woman’s]  meeting.”  “It  was  something  like  the Survivor television show or Lord of the Flies. . . . It was just goofy,” she recalled. Sue saw the meeting as the white woman inappropriately taking upon herself the authority to call the meeting and then use it as a “soapbox, as though she was teaching something new as a Native woman.”
Sue illustrated how for many non-Native people the journey to Standing Rock became a narrative of personal healing, “losing sight of the mission to protect water. For Native people it was ‘we’versus ‘I’m here to tell my story.’” This was exemplified by the white woman who used the meeting to talk about things like “healing  the inner child.” As the staff was passed around, women described stories  about  selling  personal  belongings  to finance  their  trips,  or  “the  spirit calling” them. As Sue explained, for Native people “personal healing might have been a by-product [of coming to Standing Rock] but not the mission.” Sue also spoke about a sense of fatigue in dealing  with the “hippies,” whom she was accustomed to dealing with. “Over the years I’ve noticed that what they bring is an extractive tendency to want us to share mystical knowledge for them to take for  themselves,  so  I  don’t  have  a  positive  history   of  respect  from  that community. They don’t have respect for traditions or boundaries.”
This  concept  of  taking  was  also expressed by  Darcy,  a  young  non-Native college student from Colorado who had come to Standing Rock with a group of thirteen non-Native friends, initially as part of an assignment for a Native art history class she was enrolled in. There was potential funding for the trip that would have required her to “bring something back,” presumably knowledge or experience. This weighed heavily on her, causing an “internal conflict that I’m still ethically and morally putting together.” In our video conversation I could see the pain in her face as she talked. “My friend said she wanted to be part of history,” Darcy told me, “but what are we doing that’s ever giving?” She also

spoke of not being aware of the need for skirts or of prohibitions about women who are on their monthly “moontime.” This is a Lakota protocol that restricts women from ceremonies or from certain ceremonial contexts (such as a sacred fire) and from handling food, based on the idea that this is a time of spiritual power for women that needs to be guarded. Darcy  said some women in her group were on their cycles, but that because they “didn’t feel like it aligned with their own morals, they decided to work in the kitchen anyway.” Darcy said, “I had never sat in a place where all of a sudden I had no idea how to fit in, which was an incredible learning experience and has allowed me to be empathetic, and try to understand how everyday life may be for people who are not white. But I was not prepared mentally to step back in my morals.”
To Darcy  and her friends, it was obvious that they  were in the midst of a radically different culture than the mainstream society they were accustomed to, one that constructed its own ideas of what’s normal and acceptable. But as well meaning  as  they  were  coming  in  to  the  culturally  sovereign  space  of  Oceti Sakowin, they  were unwilling in differing degrees to adjust their behavior to meet  these  new  circumstances.  This  translates  into  a  willfully  disrespectful dismissal  of  Indigenous  cultural  values.  We  might  attribute  this  attitude  to youthful  recalcitrance,  but  considered  with  other  stories  I  heard,  it  was  a phenomenon not  limited to age  group.  The  difference  in views  between the Native and non-Native interviewees revealed ruptures that Native people are far more aware of and conversant in than non-Natives are. In cultural sovereign space,  Native  values  rooted  in  communal  well-being  supersede  values  of individual fulfillment and emphasize the virtues of contributing and giving over extractive taking. It’s fair to say that the nearly yearlong tenure of the Standing Rock encampments left no one unchanged, as exemplified by the testimonies of some of the people I spoke with and countless testimonials that can be found in news stories and personal blogs. But as much as solidarity was expressed across cultural lines, it also exposed the insidious ways the systemic nature of racism manifests in even the most liberal and well-meaning activists. This is a lesson non-Native activists will need to absorb if they are to build effective partnerships with Native peoples in the future.
In light of the conflicts at Standing  Rock  and other events exemplified in chapter  6,  there  are  still  many  examples  of  ways  Indian  and  non-Indian environmental  activists  have  successfully  worked together,  even if  it  was  an afterthought or the result of another initial exclusion. In the next chapter we will look  at other examples of how coalition building  has worked to achieve the common goal of environmental protection, but in a way that highlights ongoing contradictory orientations to land and concepts of sacredness and justice.




C H A P T E R    S E V E N




Sacred Sites and Environmental Justice


The question has been asked, yet we hear no response: “What part of sacred don’t you understand?” Essentially we’re saying why isn’t it enough for us to say a site is sacred and should be set aside and protected and respected because it’s integral for our spiritual practice to be continued.

—KLEE BENALLY, NAVAJO ACTIVIST1

To be born American Indian today  is to have survived a holocaust of a very particular kind, one whose evidence is everywhere, all the time. After a pattern of  simultaneous  denial  and  justification  of  the  five-centuries-long  genocidal rampage on the continent and the settler population believing they knew what was  best  for  the  land  and  original  inhabitants,  Indigenous  peoples  focus  on revitalizing their cultures and healing from intergenerational trauma. In the new postapocalyptic world, landscapes that for millennia contained the origin stories of  the  people  often  became  unrecognizable.  Skyscrapers  mushroomed  from ancestral village sites, concrete entombed burial grounds, and superhighways paved  over  ancient  trade  routes.  Even  in  all  their  resilience,  the  trauma  of surviving an apocalypse of unspeakable proportions is an inescapable reality for today’s  Native  people.  Adding  insult  to  injury,  as  if  the  injury  weren’t  bad enough,  they  are  forced  to  fight  to  retain  access  to  what  remains  of  their homelands.  Today  the  sanctity  of  these  places  is  defined  by  their  ancient religious  significance,  or  simply  by  their  state  designation  as  a  “traditional cultural property” when only a remnant of an ancestral place remains. Protecting sacred sites is one of the most difficult and pressing issues Native people now face.  Widely  varying  histories  and  legal  relationships  to  federal  and  state governments  result  in  a  complex  tangle  of  circumstance,  which  means  that approaches  to  protecting  such  sites  are  far  from  universal.  Negative  court decisions  still  haunt  efforts  to protect  sites,  because  they  construct  the  legal framework from which other sacred site battles are waged. Some sacred sites involve  treaty  rights  and  some  do  not.  Sacred  site  protection  battles  are

sometimes fought as religious freedom issues, but such cases have met with little success, given that Western conceptions of religion and sacredness that construct legislation   and   govern   court   decisions   are   dramatically	different—and unrecognizable—from Indigenous conceptions. As this chapter argues, viewing sacred site protection as an environmental justice issue can be a more effective framework for sacred site protection, adding another layer of legal protection at the very least, in light of the limited capacity for justice the legal and policy landscape currently offers. At the same time, it highlights ways Native peoples are working in successful partnerships to protect land for sometimes different but ultimately mutually beneficial reasons.


TRUST LAND, TREATY RIGHTS, AND STANDING ROC K
Indian  reservations  are  lands  reserved  in  treaties,  by   executive  order,  or congressional acts. They are not gifts of the federal government to tribes; they are products of massive land cessions by tribes that created the United States (though not all tribes had treaties). The legal foundation of Indian reservations rests upon the principle of trust. The federal government holds Indian lands as the  trustee  for  tribal  nations  in  what’s  sometimes  called  “aboriginal  title”; reservation lands are also called “trust lands,” and tribes with reservations are considered federally recognized tribes. Trust lands are not subject to the same property laws as fee simple lands (such as property taxes and local zoning laws) because of American Indians’ inherent sovereignty as preconstitutional peoples. Tribes can also own land in fee simple, but unless they are placed in trust status, they  are no different from other fee simple lands, subject to taxes and other property-based legal regimes. On trust lands tribal governments have jurisdiction within the boundaries of those lands, so protecting sacred sites on reservations is a matter of tribal sovereignty. But original tribal territories invariably extended far  beyond  current  boundaries,  and  areas  beyond  those  boundaries  always contain important cultural sites or resources.
Written into the  treaties  that  ceded tribal  lands  to the  US  were  rights  for Native peoples to access the ceded lands for hunting, fishing, and other cultural resources. Treaty making ended with an act of Congress in 1871, but after that, countless unilateral actions by the settler US government shrank reserved treaty lands. As we have seen, the most notorious of those actions was the Dawes Act, which within half a century reduced treaty-reserved lands by two-thirds in what Indians consider to be blatant treaty violations. In many cases lands were just seized without ratified treaties or other legal instruments, as was the case in California where eighteen treaties were made but never ratified. Oceti Sakowin,

the Great Sioux Nation, comprised several separate but related bands of Lakota who were joined together on the Great Sioux Reservation by the Treaty of Fort Laramie in 1851, is a textbook example of lands reserved through treaties but later diminished by  acts never agreed to by  the Lakota, Nakota, and Dakota people. The result was the fragmentation of the Great Sioux  Reservation into smaller reservations known today as Pine Ridge, Rosebud, Lower Brulé, Crow Creek,  Yankton,  Sisseton  Wahpeton,  Santee,  Cheyenne  River,  and  Standing Rock.
The  Dakota  Access  Pipeline  was  controversial  not  only  because  it  was rerouted to avoid Bismarck  and threatened Standing Rock’s water source but also because its route was directly in the path of sacred lands outside today’s reservation boundary  lines, and still well within the unceded territory  of the original Great Sioux Reservation. More than one desecration occurred. The first occurred in early September 2016 when bulldozers cut a one-hundred-fifty-foot-wide swath of land for a stretch of two miles that contained eighty-two cultural features and twenty-seven burials, the event that immediately preceded the first of the violent attacks on water protectors. SRST chairman Dave Archambault asserted that the tribe had not been properly consulted as required under federal law, despite numerous letters sent to the Army Corps of Engineers requesting consultation.2   A  second  desecration  occurred  on  October  17  when  Energy Transfer Partners’ construction workers unearthed another cultural site and for ten days  failed to report  it  to the  North Dakota  Public  Service  Commission permitting agency, which SRST perceived as violating conditions of the permit and the National Historic Preservation Act.3
The violation of Standing Rock’s sacred sites is an example of how easily it can occur, even when treaty rights, in theory, grant a measure of legal protection to federally recognized tribes. Things are infinitely more complicated for tribes who don’t have land bases or who are not federally recognized, or both. This is exemplified  by  one  particular  sacred-site  battle  in  Southern  California  that culminated in 2008 in the homelands of the Acjachemen people.


PANHE: AN INDIGENOUS PLAC E AT THE C ROSSROADS
The Acjachemen people, also known as the Juaneño Band of Mission Indians, occupied  much  of  today’s  Orange  County,  California,  overlapping  territories with   their   northerly   Tongva   neighbors   and   more   southerly   Luiseño,   or Payómkawichum,  neighbors  in  numerous  village  groups.  The  largest  of  the ancient Acjachemen village sites is known as Panhe (which means “the place at the water”), and its center lies within the San Mateo Creek watershed within San

Mateo  Creek  Campground.  Complicating  jurisdiction  over  Panhe  is  that  the campground lies within San Onofre State Beach, a three-thousand-acre coastal canyon area under a fifty-year lease from the Department of the Navy, which owns  Camp  Pendleton  Marine  Base  adjacent  to  the  San  Onofre  Nuclear Generating  Station—and that  the  Acjachemen are  not  a  federally  recognized tribe. In other words, Panhe is located within a state park, which is within a military  base  next  to a  nuclear  plant.  Acjachemen people  today  affirm  their ancestral knowledge that prior to colonization Panhe referred to the entire valley that now constitutes parts of Camp Pendleton and San Onofre State Beach and much of today’s town of San Clemente. What is currently recognized as Panhe is confined to a small area within San Mateo Campground, where there is still a burial   and  ceremonial   site.   Panhe   is   considered  the   most   sacred  of   all Acjachemen places.
Panhe is confirmed by archeologists to be at least 9,600 years old, making it one of just a few remaining sites of such antiquity in the state that have not been bulldozed and built upon. In 1981 Panhe received an official Determination of Eligibility  for  the  National  Register  of  Historic  Places  by  the  National  Park Service,   and  in  the  same   year   it  was   recorded  with  the   State   Historic Preservation  Office,  at  which  point  it  became  organized  as  the  San  Mateo Archeological  District.  In 1989  the  state  agency  California  Native  American Heritage Commission added Panhe to its Sacred Lands inventory as a result of extensive documentation by Acjachemen elders.4 In addition to middens (waste heaps often consisting  of shells, indicating  ancient human habitation), human remains had been found within the boundaries of San Onofre State Beach, once in 1969 during  construction of  the  nuclear  plant,  and then again years  later, during a military construction project at Camp Pendleton when twelve sets of remains  were  found.5   Despite  Panhe’s  enduring  cultural  significance  to  the Acjachemen,  or  Juaneño,  people,  it  is  entirely  out  of  their  control.  Without federal recognition, the Acjachemen have no access to what few federal laws there are protecting Native American sacred sites and religion.
Panhe was threatened by  plans to build a toll road through the San Mateo Creek watershed, which became widely known in 2006. The 241 toll road was proposed by  the privately  owned Transportation Corridor Agencies (TCA) to alleviate  traffic  on  California’s  main  artery,  Highway  5.  The  bulk  of  the controversy  emerged  when  the  public  became  aware  that  the  last  six-  mile segment skirting San Clemente in the south would cross into Camp Pendleton and the state park, where it would finally connect to Highway 5, dangerously close to the Trestles surf break, where San Mateo Creek empties into the ocean.

Trestles is one of the most coveted and famous surf spots in California and even the world. In this section, the proposed road would run parallel to the creek for approximately two miles, adjacent to the campground, and a scant twenty feet from Panhe.6  Environmental impact studies revealed that the creek bed would likely  be  completely  torn  up  as  the  highway’s  one-hundred-foot-high  pillars would be anchored into bedrock, totally disrupting the creek’s flow by diversion. More alarming was the effect such dramatic disruption would have downstream at Trestles. A primary determinant of wave quality is the topography of the ocean bottom.  Excessive  silt  deposits  washing  downstream  from  road  construction would undoubtedly degrade the near-perfect wave quality that Trestles is famous for,  an  effect  that  would  be  unmitigatable  once  inflicted.  When  the  surf community got wind of the threat to Trestles in 2006, it was game on; for them Trestles was sacred ground, and any threat to it was intolerable. That was when the anti-toll road movement became organized as a campaign, “Save Trestles, Stop the Toll Road.” The mass distribution of bumper stickers and lawn signs all over San Clemente had awakened the sleeping giant, and suddenly everyone had an opinion, and it wasn’t in support of the toll road. The news that Trestles was in danger spread like wildfire far beyond the California surf community, making the “Save Trestles” campaign an international issue.7 What followed was a flurry of	organizing	across	multiple	stakeholder	lines	involving	surfers, environmentalists,  and a  group of  American Indian people  called the  United Coalition to Protect Panhe (UCPP).
The UCPP came together as a grassroots group of Acjachemen tribal members in 2007 to bring attention to the American Indian aspect of the toll road issue, since few others were concerned with it, let alone even knew about it. They also saw it as an opportunity  to expand their ceremonial use of Panhe while they worked to protect it. Their strategy was to build alliances with environmentalist and surf organizations like the Sierra Club and Surfrider Foundation—those with whom they otherwise had little connection—to enhance public perceptions about why the toll road must not be built. Although the UCPP was a relative latecomer to the campaign, their work took things in a critical direction. The UCPP alerted the California Coastal Commission about the toll road’s impact on the sacred site. The Coastal Commission must comply with the Coastal Act and other state laws, including laws related to tribal cultural resources, and it is the agency who grants the final permits to development projects in the coastal zone.8  What is clear  in hindsight  is  that  few  people  outside  the  Native  community  and the Coastal Commission realized the important role Panhe would ultimately play in the fight to stop the toll road.

Numerous legal attempts to stop the toll road were ongoing, including one lawsuit   filed   by   the   California   Native   American   Heritage   Commission (CNAHC), which was based on the enforcement of state laws protecting Native Americans’ right to free exercise of religion. In fact, one of the UCPP’s key achievements was its appeal to the CNAHC, eventually triggering the lawsuit. After several years of battles waged by  multiple stakeholders, the toll road’s death knell  came  on February  6,  2008,  when by  a  vote  of  eight  to two the Coastal   Commission  denied  the   permit   certification,   arguing   that   it   was inconsistent with the Coastal Act because of policy  violations and the road’s impact on environmentally sensitive habitat areas, wetlands, public access and recreation, surfing, public views, water quality, archeological resources, energy and vehicle miles traveled, and conflict resolution. Illustrating the importance of the “archeological resources” (sacred sites), Commissioner Mary Schallenberger stated,

There is a huge disconnect in understanding between the Native American culture,  and  the—what  would  I  call  it?—the  rest  of  the  culture  of California. . . . What I learned and came to respect is that for the Native Americans, quite often, their sacred sites are different. They are absolutely tied to, and integral to a specific place on the earth. Churches, synagogues, and I believe mosques can be moved. They can be moved, and they can be reblessed, or whatever that particular religion calls for, and the worship can go  on  in  a  different  building  in  a  different  place.  With  the  Native Americans, that is often not the case.9

Besides the Coastal Commission, other government agencies that opposed the project included the State Department of Parks and Recreation, California Native American Heritage Commission, State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), and the  federal  Advisory  Council  on  Historic  Preservation.  All  agreed  with  the Coastal  Commission’s  determination  that  based  on  the  draft  environmental impact report, no reasonable mitigation was possible in all areas of concern. In particular, regarding the archeological resources, the commission’s report stated that  “the  impacts  to  the  Juaneño/Acjachemen  people  who  currently  use  the ceremonial site are completely unmitigated.”10  Also at issue in the report was that Panhe should have been evaluated as a “traditional cultural property” (TCP) based on the advice of SHPO, which had not been done, and because it hadn’t, there  was  inadequate  information to make  a  determination for  consistency.11 After the Coastal Commission denied the toll road permit, TCA appealed to the US Commerce Department, who denied the appeal later that year. The Save

Trestles campaign was a success, at least for the time being, but everybody knew that the fight wasn’t over—the forces of development weren’t going to give up that easily. In the meantime, a larger alliance had been formed among twelve national  and  state  environmental  organizations,  called  the  Save  San  Onofre Coalition, and in 2016 the coalition reached a settlement agreement with TCA to end the six  lawsuits that had been filed against them. In the settlement, TCA agreed to abandon the 241 route through the San Mateo Creek watershed and pursue other alternatives.


ENVIRONMENTALJUSTIC E AND INDIGENOUS DIFFERENC E
In chapter 1 we saw that environmental justice as it is ordinarily conceived of is inadequate for tribal nations in the US, because it fails to acknowledge broader histories of colonization and current frameworks of sovereignty, however limited they  are  within  the  modern  State  system.  Indigenous  peoples  face  political circumstances that differ dramatically  from other ethnic minorities; their pre-State connections to ancestral homelands and traditional cultures, which they are constantly fighting to protect, mean a different relationship to the State, as they are political relationships based on treaties and inherent sovereignty. Chapter 1 described how the State—in this case, the US government—interferes in the collective  continuance  of  a  people,  disabling  their  systems  of  responsibility, which are built upon place-based knowledge accumulated over vast periods of time. Inherent to these systems of responsibility is the concept of sanctity, that which  is  held  to  be  sacred  within  Indigenous  worldviews.  Differentiating  a mainstream  EJ  framework  from  an  Indigenized  EJ  framework  must  also, therefore,  proceed from  the  assumption that  Indigenous  worldviews  reflect  a different  relationship to land,  a  relationship that  does  not  separate  people  or culture from land, nor creates anthropocentric hierarchies within nature. Simply put, from an Indigenous perspective, nonhuman life forms have agency in a way that   they   do   not   in   dominant   Western   cultures.   Likewise,   the   religious significance of a place is the spiritual glue that binds peoples to their homelands.
The US legal system has been incapable of recognizing Indigenous peoples’ very different relationship to land largely because of its recognition of land as property. In cases where sites are successfully protected, the protection is based on concepts Western law is able to reconcile. In the case of Panhe, a measure of legal protection was available via state law by  virtue of Panhe’s location on publicly owned lands that had been designated as an “archeological resource” deserving of protection, a framework that recognizes Panhe’s relevance to the Acjachemen people (framed as a “cultural resource”). Panhe’s eligibility for the

National Register of Historic Places and its listing on the CNAHC Sacred Lands Inventory were critical as a protective mechanism, just as an evaluation of it as a traditional cultural property likely would have been, had such an evaluation been made.12  However, protective frameworks of Panhe that were constructed based on its national historical significance also rather problematically define Panhe in terms  of  its  significance  to  all  American  people,  Acjachemen  and  non-Acjachemen   alike.   These   kinds   of   claims   amount   to   a   form   of   settler appropriation of Native culture based on our collective history (all Americans), our State-based heritage, and not exclusively  Acjachemen history  or heritage. Because Acjachemen history  and heritage is ours, it is worthy  of protecting. Acjachemen identity is effectively submerged into a homogenizing narrative that has the effect of erasing Native concerns, even while it purports to be protecting them.  Ironically,  Panhe  was  protectable  because  of  its  absorption  into  what eventually became publicly owned or leased lands, subject to laws designed for the homogenized masses that comprise the American public, not necessarily or primarily because of its inherent meaning for Acjachemen people.
The  story  of  Panhe  demonstrates  how  the  Acjachemen  as  constitutionally preexisting sovereign people—even though they are not federally recognized— asserted their political identity as Native people to protect their ancestral lands in response to the threat of the inevitable environmental destruction that would be committed there (constituting further religious desecration and limited access to a religious site) had the toll road been built. Their ancient historical ties to the land were the indisputable vehicle available for them to argue for the protection of the land, while other protective mechanisms used by non-Native people were based  on  protecting  the  environment  itself,  divorced  from  any   aspect  of connection between humans and the land (aside from how their recreational use of it would be affected).13  By  and large, this is not a political or ideological avenue  that  is  available  to  other  ethnic  minorities  in  their  struggles  for environmental justice, highlighting Indigenous difference.
The  domination  framework  of  the  US  settler  State  means  that  the  State appoints  itself  as  the  determiner  of  identity  for  Indigenous  peoples.  Without federal recognition, an Indian group or nation may be Indian by self-definition, amounting to no more than an ethnic classification, but it does not necessarily attach to the rights associated with the political recognition granted through the legal  fictions  of  federal  Indian  law.  Federally  recognized  tribes,  even  those without land bases, in theory have the ability to acquire land and have it placed in trust  (as  difficult  as  this  process  is,  and as  the  example  of  the  Federated Indians of the Graton Rancheria illustrates). As Indian trust land, it then becomes

subject to the jurisdiction of federal Indian law and a certain level of sovereignty. If the Acjachemen (Juaneño) were federally recognized, and if they were able to overcome the nearly impossible odds that would result in their acquiring Panhe, and if they could achieve the monumental task of having Panhe placed into trust, then by virtue of their federally sanctioned sovereignty they would have had the power to stop the road and protect their sacred site via the mechanisms accorded to them through federal Indian law. The Acjachemen, like many  other tribal nations and individual Indians in the United States, inhabit an identity gray zone politically—not  non-Indian  in  the  eyes  of  the  state  of  California,  but  not necessarily Indian in the eyes of the federal government.14  As a tribal nation, they  are  not  subject  to  the  laws  that  would  support  the  limited  sovereignty available to federally recognized tribes, but as individual Indians, Acjachemen people  are  entitled  to  some  of  the  benefits  guaranteed  under  some  legal definitions of “Indian.”15  So to conceptually transcend the limits the US State imposes on Native people through legal definitions of “Indian” or “tribe,” EJ frameworks must be able to situate tribal peoples’ struggles to protect sacred places with their relationality to land, not with artificial constructions of identity.


THE C ONC EPT OF THE SAC RED
The very  thing  that distinguishes Indigenous peoples from settler societies is their unbroken connection to ancestral homelands. Their cultures and identities are linked to their original places in ways that define them, as reflected through language, place names, and cosmology or religion. In Indigenous worldviews, there is no separation between people and land, between people and other life forms, or between people and their ancient ancestors whose bones are infused in the  land  they  inhabit.  All  things  in  nature  contain  spirit  (specific  types  of consciousness), thus the world is seen and experienced in spiritual terms. As many scholars have noted, the Indigenous world is a world of relationships built on reciprocity,  respect,  and responsibility,  not  just  between humans  but  also extending to the entire natural world. Indigenous relationships with nature have been stereotyped and appropriated by dominant society in a multitude of ways (such  as  the  ecological  Indian),  but  in  reality  are  rooted  in  a  philosophical paradigm very different from that of dominant Western society.
Native scholars argue that the difference between Indigenous conceptions of the sacred and Western conceptions are their different orientations to time and space. Vine Deloria Jr., in particular, first articulated these ideas in his pioneering book God Is Red: A Native View of Religion (1973), and later built upon them in his theoretically  dense The Metaphysics of Modern Existence (1979). In both

works Deloria presents fundamental challenges to the Newtonian-Cartesian view of a mechanistic, linear universe. Identifying Western paradigms and drawing on Deloria, Osage theologian George Tinker observes that centuries ago Europeans adopted a  perceptual  orientation based on temporality.  Time,  as  the  primary organizing  intellectual  principle  to  which  a  spatial  orientation  is  secondary, creates a linear and unidimensional world in which human existence is perceived as motion through space, which is cast as the past, present, and future.16  An orientation that favors time over space in which the world is perceived in terms of progress based on forward motion naturally results in systems of hierarchy. Hierarchies of knowledge and life forms (evolution; concepts of superiority and inferiority),  for  example,  make  it  possible  for  a  paradigm  of  domination  to become a guiding principle in a society. The sacred is also perceived in terms of history;  places  are  sacred  because  of  the  events  associated  with  them  and contained within time. For instance, for Christians, Jews, and Muslims, Deloria argues, particular sites in the Holy Land are sacred primarily because of their historical significance more than a sense of rootedness in them, as is true in Native American cultures.17
For Indigenous peoples, a spatial orientation emphasizes human linkages with place, and all the elements of that place, spanning time. These connections are reflected by and infused in all aspects of Native life, including identity, culture, and ceremonial cycles, as people recognize themselves as having been placed there by spiritual forces to which they are responsible. But this responsibility is a two-way street, and the elements of those places are seen to be responsible to the people as well; this reciprocal relationship forms a sense of kinship with the land itself.18  The emotional bonds of people to place reflects an egalitarianism that does not distinguish hierarchies of importance, and as Tinker observes, “humans lose their status of ‘primacy’and ‘dominion.’. . . American Indians are driven by their  culture  and  spirituality  to  recognize  the  personhood  of  all  ‘things’  in creation.”19  Said another way, for Indigenous people land and all its elements have agency  by  virtue of their very  life energy  in a way  that they  do not in Western cultures. Humans are only part of the natural world, neither central to nor separate from it.


LEGAL INADEQUAC IES, C OALITION BUILDING, AND AMERIC AN INDIAN EJ
The story of Panhe is a study of how, in the absence of federal protection, the laws of a state government (California) were used to protect an American Indian

sacred site based on a combination of factors, and not primarily it being a Native sacred  site.  Yet  while  the  salvation  of  Trestles  was  celebrated  as  the  most significant achievement of stopping the toll road, in the big picture, few seemed to realize the importance of protecting Panhe still contributed to that victory. The comments of Commissioner Mary Schallenberger quoted above are telling for how an American Indian religious paradigm was fortunately able to seep into the awareness of a powerful government official and effect a positive outcome.20 The  Indigenous  idea  that  recognizes  agency  in sacred places  helps  shift  the balance  of  power  that  currently  favors  Eurocentric  configurations  of  justice, which deny Indigenous spiritual realities and the rights of the Earth.
Yet despite existing legal EJ frameworks and laws to protect their religious freedoms,  Native  peoples  continue  to fight  for  the  protection of  sacred sites within  an  inadequate  and  often  unjust  system.  During  the  period  of  forced assimilation, the US banned American Indians from practicing their traditional religions  through  a  variety  of  rules  and  laws,  notably  the  Indian  Religious Crimes Code (also known as the Code of Indian Offenses, 1883), which imposed prison sentences and suspended rations for those caught leading or participating in Indigenous ceremonies.21 More than half a century after Indians were granted citizenship, they finally received full protection for freedom of religion. In 1978 Congress  passed  the  American  Indian  Religious  Freedom  Act  (AIRFA)  to officially  outlaw  government  bans  on  American  Indian  religions.  The  law guarantees access to sacred sites but does not guarantee environmental integrity or the conditions necessary  for religious practices in natural open spaces. US courts routinely deny Native legal appeals to protect lands where there are sacred sites, the precedent having been set in the Supreme Court case Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery  Protective  Association (1988).  In Lyng  the  court  ruled  that building a road through a site of traditional spiritual significance and ceremonial practice of three tribes in Northern California (Karuk, Tolowa, and Yurok) did not constitute a violation of their freedom of religion. The court argued that “the First Amendment bars only outright prohibitions, indirect coercion, and penalties on the free exercise of religion.”22 Lyng set a dangerous precedent that continues to  haunt  Native  American  battles  to  protect  sacred  sites.  While  AIRFA guarantees access to sacred sites, the Lyng decision illustrates why and how the Karuk, Tolowa, and Yurok tribes were unable to find protection for their sites based on the act. It comes down to differences in how religion is conceived in Western and Indigenous worldviews.
The high-profile case to protect the San Francisco Peaks perfectly illustrates how the legal system failed to recognize the significance of Native American

spiritual beliefs and the desecration of a sacred site on publicly owned lands at the hands of powerful developers. The San Francisco Peaks in Arizona is sacred to at least thirteen tribal nations in the Four Corners region of the Southwest (upward of hundreds of thousands of individual Indians) for the way it figures into their creation stories and for the centrality of the mountain to the spiritual practices and other cultural activities of those people. In the 1970s the US Forest Service allowed the building of a ski resort, against the protests of the tribes who, based on their beliefs about the sanctity of the place, felt that the mountain should be protected from development. Then in the early  2000s the resulting Snowbowl  Ski  Resort  applied  for  a  permit  to  expand  the  resort  and  add snowmaking equipment that would utilize reclaimed sewage water. The tribes responded with a  massive  campaign and two lawsuits  to oppose  the  permit, arguing that the use of treated effluent would pose significant health risks to all people,  particularly  those  who  still  use  the  mountain  to  gather  plants  for medicine and other traditional practices. When the lawsuit came before the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in 2009, a narrow interpretation of the American Indian Religious Freedom Act again made the law unavailable to protect the land. The court claimed that the only effect of the proposed upgrades is on “the Plaintiffs’ subjective,  emotional  religious  experience.  That  is,  the  presence  of  recycled wastewater on the Peaks is offensive to the plaintiffs’ religious sensibilities. . . . The diminishment of spiritual fulfillment—serious though it may be—is not a ‘substantial burden’ on the free exercise of religion.”23 Twice the Supreme Court declined   to   review   the   lower   court’s   decision,   and   while   the   Obama administration had the power to intervene, it chose not to. The campaign to stop the development is still active despite its setbacks, but now focuses on technical legal  maneuvers  supporting  claims  that  the  Forest  Service  was  negligent  in disseminating  appropriate  information  to  the  public  regarding  the  potential health threats, effectively eliminating an argument based on religious or spiritual meaning.
The Save the Peaks campaign, like the campaign to protect Panhe, relied upon diverse coalitions of groups with similar objectives to accomplish their goals. In these campaigns, Native people find themselves aligned with groups who have often been their opponents, particularly in the environmentalist community, as we observed in chapter 5. In these cases the need for coalition building between environmentalists and Native peoples is clear, as was true in the Panhe struggle to preserve a particular place, even if for different reasons, facilitated relatively easy alliances. Professor of geography and Native studies Zoltán Grossman did an  exhaustive  two-decade-long  study  of  unlikely  alliances  between  Native peoples and otherwise unrelated—and sometimes antagonistic—groups across

multiple regions of the US to show the effectiveness of this kind of organizing. In one of the most recent and visible examples of successful coalition building that Grossman covers, the ironically named Cowboy Indian Alliance (CIA) was instrumental in the stunning defeat of the Keystone XL Pipeline by the Obama administration in 2015. White ranchers and Native people had begun organizing informally in South Dakota as early as 1987, when they came together initially to oppose a gunnery range where the Honeywell Corporation would test depleted uranium-tipped munitions deep in the Black Hills country—the place of origin for the Lakota and the location of large cattle ranches that were already suffering economically. The Honeywell project was averted, and the alliance would not converge  again  until  2000  when  it  successfully  blocked  a  coal-transporting railroad operation.  The  CIA moniker  was  revived a  third time  in 2013 after American Indians, First Nations people in Canada, and non-Native agricultural and  environmental  allies  organized  across  international  boundaries  with  the signing of a treaty to collectively oppose the southern leg of the Keystone XL Pipeline, which was designed to transport Alberta tar sands oil to American ports in the Gulf of Mexico. The pipeline would not only threaten the underground Ogallala Aquifer everybody depended on but also subject ranchers and farmers to land seizure through imminent domain laws. Recognizing  the irony  of the gathering, Chief Phil Lane poignantly remarked,

Those ranchers came in and spoke to that council, and they  shared their heart. . . . So finally we came back after the treaty signing . . . we had about ten or fifteen ranchers there, they  all got up to speak  . . . and one after another they got up and said they’re infuriated. They said . . . “How could this happen? How can people take our land? How can they do this to us?” And of course . . . we didn’t see a smile but everybody knew what we was thinking about from our side. . . . So finally, this last sister got up to speak, and she just said, “I just am so infuriated, they’re coming and taking our land . . . they just can’t do it without our consent. . . . This is our land that our families have lived in since . . . you know, how long they have been there.” And said, “They’re treating us just like . . . just like . . .,” and then one of the relatives said, “Just like the Indians.” And all of the [sic] sudden there was this beautiful pause and everybody’s like, “Yes!” And one of my relatives walked over to her and says, “Welcome to the tribe, welcome to the tribe.”24

Returning  to  Southern  California,  several  years  after  the  Panhe  victory,  a similar  battle  played  out  in  Orange  County  in  the  wealthy  coastal  city  of

Newport Beach in October 2016—during the Standing Rock occupation. One of the last remaining beachfront open spaces in Southern California was slated for a massive  development  that  included hundreds  of  upscale  homes,  a  hotel,  and shopping mall, but the proposed project was defeated due to the broad coalition building of multiple stakeholders, including environmentalists and tribal people. Referred to as Newport Banning Ranch, the land is an ancient dwelling place of Tongva and Acjachemen people, who know the site as Genga. In that case the Coastal Commission denied permits based on the protection of sensitive habitats and  the  preponderance  of  Native  sacred  sites.  In  its  decision,  three  of  the commissioners stressed the  need for  Native nations to be properly  consulted (which hadn’t been adequately done), and one noted that Standing Rock was a good example of why. 25
As  Native  peoples  have  stressed decolonization as  the  appropriate  path to social justice, coalition building continues to gather steam as one of the most effective   decolonizing   strategies   for   protecting   sacred   sites.   Worldwide, Indigenous  peoples  are  joining  forces  with  each  other  and  with  non-Native peoples,  fighting  not  only  to  stop  endless  expropriation  of  their  lands  by multinational  forces  driven by  market  fundamentalism  but  also to produce  a paradigm shift that acknowledges their worldviews as a legitimate and necessary basis  for  understanding  the  world  we  all  live  in.  Whether  it’s  fighting  the neoliberal structural adjustment programs of the International Monetary Fund, which  aim  to  develop  Indigenous  lands  with  toxic  industries  in  so-called developing nations; preventing the dumping of nuclear waste within a sacred mountain  (Yucca  Mountain);  or  simply  guaranteeing  access  to  a  ceremonial ground, all together these battles constitute what Native activists regularly refer to as “environmental justice.” Organizations like the Indigenous Environmental Network,   Honor   the   Earth,   Cultural   Conservancy,   Sustainable   Nations Development Project, National Environmental Coalition of Native Americans, Seventh Generation Fund, and innumerable others, both within and beyond the United States, focus their efforts to build a web of ideas at the intersection of the concepts of sacred, environment, and justice.
Beth Rose Middleton, whose work examines Native Americans’ use of land trusts  and private  conservation as  a  means  to protect  access  to sacred sites, challenges   the   conventional   understanding   of   environmental   justice.   She acknowledges the history of the land conservation movement in the US that has contributed to Native land dispossession, and that the “cultural foundations of the   notion   of   conservation   and   public   benefit   must   be   interrogated,”26 particularly since private conservation is hardly private, because it is subject to

public statutes, funding, and incentives. She further argues that

environmental justice is analytically important to private conservation, yet it remains under-discussed and under-utilized in the conservation field. As Mary Christina Wood and Zachary Welcker note, “by integrating humans into conserved landscapes, the tribal trust movement will draw attention to the  role  of  land in the  pursuit  of  social  justice  and human rights.  This dimension  has  been  much  ignored  by  the  conservation  movement.”  An environmental justice analysis is essential for expanding conservation tools that   have   heretofore   been   used   for   relatively   narrow   conservation purposes.27

In other words, unless and until legal tools that restore Native peoples’ access to ancestral places incorporate Indigenous conceptions of relationality to land in environmental   justice   projects,   those   policies   will   ultimately   reproduce relationships of domination that continually  hamstring  tribal efforts to regain access to these sacred sites. These legal tools include whatever protocols tribes may utilize in the short term, be they conservation and land trusts and easements, environmental  law,  religious  freedom  protection,  sacred  lands  inventories, archeological resource protection, and in the long term, whatever new forms we may in the future imagine for sacred site protection.
Environmental justice for Native peoples encompasses a broad spectrum of concerns,  from  protecting  sensitive  environmental  habitats  and  communities from the ravages of toxic industries, to the assurance that lands deemed holy by them are still available for their uninterrupted ceremonial, spiritual, and cultural practices. Centering  Native peoples in EJ frameworks holds the potential for legal  protection that  is  meaningful  and responsive  to their  specific  histories, treaties, and spiritually  based cultures. Had there been such a mechanism to which  the  Army   Corps  of  Engineers  and  Energy   Transfer  Partners  were accountable,  it’s  not  hard to imagine  that  there  might  have  been a  different outcome for the Standing Rock Sioux people. If such a mechanism existed in California law, the added layer of legal protection might have prevented the Transportation   Corridor   Agencies   from   designing   a   road   alignment   that threatened  Panhe  in  the  first  place.  As  the  cases  examined  in  this  chapter illustrate, despite their often-troubled histories with each other, and even though their relationships with each other are still far from conflict-free, Native and non-Native people nonetheless share connections to land that they each consider sacred, in albeit different ways. In the face of threats by corporate development and toxic infrastructure projects, the need to join forces has never been greater.

What’s obvious is that Indigenous resistance is increasingly a shared struggle, and that negotiating the tricky terrain of environmental justice frameworks that work for Native peoples’ is challenging and demands coordinated responses in ever more creative and innovative ways.




C H A P T E R    E I G H T




Ways Forward for Environmental Justice in Indian Country


It may be true as Martin Luther King Jr. once said, that the arc of the moral universe is long but it bends towards justice. What is equally true, however, is that most of the time we have to forcibly bend it with our very own hands.

—THOMAS LINZEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENTAL LEGAL DEFENSE FUND1

Throughout  this  book  I  have  argued  that  for  environmental  justice  to  be responsive to the needs of Native peoples it must be indigenized—tailored to account for their very different histories, relationships to the land, and political relationships to the State. This indigenization must occur across all aspects of the EJ  realm,  from  the  halls  of  academia  to  policy  framework  building  at  the government  level  and  to  environmental  activist  organizing.  I  have  argued, furthermore,  that  for  this  process  to  be  effective  it  must  confront  both  the foundation of white supremacy that inflects the social and legal landscape of the US and the ways white supremacy continues to obstruct those relationships. I have also pointed to ways various groups are navigating these rough waters to form    workable,    mutually    beneficial    partnerships.    Expanding    on    this conversation, I close with a chapter highlighting positive trends, with examples of  how  indications  of  progressive  change  can  nonetheless  be  seen,  despite renewed threats to the environment and Indian country on the national front. We turn back to California for a view of how some of these changes are taking place. The defeat of the 241 toll road in San Clemente was a significant victory for many  reasons  and  people,  but  particularly  for  Southern  California’s  Indian communities. In a place where the landscape has been dramatically altered in so short  a  period  of  time,  land  protection  victories  are  few  and  far  between. California’s hyperdevelopment since the Gold Rush came at the greatest cost to California  Indians.  The  state’s  prolific  growth  was  built  upon  a  tradition  of
ethnic cleansing that has been largely hidden from the public.

Perhaps nowhere is the pattern of Indigenous erasure more pronounced than in California’s beach lifestyle and surf culture. Several years after the initial toll-road victory, the environmentalist organization Surfrider Foundation produced a short video recounting  the successful Save Trestles campaign in an effort to block a renewed threat from developers. As the video showed, their campaign had focused entirely on saving the cobbled rocks responsible for Trestles’ perfect waves and the extraordinary water quality of San Mateo Creek. The video makes no mention of the sacred site of Panhe or the critical role Native communities played in the Coastal Commission’s denial of the permit.2 In a few short years, the contributions and perspectives of the Indigenous activists whose efforts were essential to blocking the toll road were forgotten.
Considering  the  extent  of  Indigenous  erasure  in  California,  the  Coastal Commission’s decision to oppose a major infrastructure project on the grounds that it would have “unmitigatable” effects on sacred Native lands is all the more noteworthy.  To  some,  it  signaled  a  shifting  tide  in  California’s  approach  to working with tribal nations. More generally, it animated the possibility of a new beginning for the environmental community’s relationship to Indigenous peoples and their specific needs within the movement.
The Coastal Commission’s landmark decision fit within a growing trend of pro-Indian decision making in the state. In 2014 the California legislature passed Assembly  Bill  52,  which  expands  the  California  Environmental  Quality  Act review process to include a “traditional cultural resource” assessment for lead agencies  that  prepare  certain environmental  documents,  in effect  augmenting Senate Bill 18 of 2004, which provides limited protections for nonreservation lands and nonfederally recognized tribes through tribal consultation. Further, in 2012 the California Natural Resources Agency  adopted a Tribal Consultation Policy  in  response  to  an  executive  order  by  Governor  Jerry  Brown,  which explicitly signaled the government’s intention to “encourage communication and consultation with California Indian Tribes.”3
Native and non-Native groups fought and won a battle similar to the Save Trestles campaign against big corporate development in 2014, also in Orange County.  Eight  years  after  the  successful  protection  of  Panhe,  the  Coastal Commission denied a permit for the Newport Banning Ranch development at the traditional site of Genga in Newport Beach, in the shared ancestral territory of Tongva  and Acjachemen people.  The  development would have  crammed yet another upscale mall, a hotel and resort, and hundreds of homes for the wealthy on four hundred acres of the only remaining beachfront open space in the region. The  efforts  of  the  activist  coalitions  organizing  against  the  developers  were

characterized by an increased level of attention and deeper respect for Native nation perspectives and paradigms. They heeded the wisdom of the Panhe fight and understood that stronger  protection for  traditional cultural resources  was most effective in protecting land where numerous sacred sites were documented and worked favorably to restore a landscape that had also been damaged from decades of oil drilling.4  Greater recognition of Native history and rights at the governmental   level   and  more   respectful,   functional   relationships   between activist groups and American Indians at the community level is indicative of this larger productive trend in environmental protection efforts.5  In the face of an intensifying  climate  change  crisis,  relentless  land  development,  and  ongoing consolidation of power in the fossil fuel industry, it may well be that organizing around Native  land rights  holds  the  key  to successfully  transitioning  from  a fossil-fuel  energy   infrastructure  to  one  based  on  sustainable  energy.  This paradigm shift would bring environmental justice closer to Indigenous peoples and other vulnerable communities in the United States.
However, as we have seen, the imperialist roots of federal Indian law present daunting obstacles to justice for American Indians. If American Indians are to experience  real  environmental  justice—which  means  not  only   ending   the poisoning of their environments but also regaining access to and protection of their sacred sites and ancient territories—it means confronting a “state built on the pillars of capitalism, colonialism, and white supremacy.”6 The confrontation must occur at all levels, from the individual to the institutional, and ultimately dismantle  the  legal,  social,  and  policy  frameworks  that  uphold  an  ongoing system of domination. Indigenizing  environmental justice in these ways goes beyond a distributive model of justice.
Dismantling the mechanisms of domination—or decolonization—as the path to  environmental  justice  for  Indian  country  is  admittedly  a  gargantuan  and idealistic task. It’s probably even unthinkable to many in positions of power. The barriers  are  formidable,  given  the  depth  and  breadth  of  American  prejudice against  Indigenous  peoples.  Tribal  sovereignty  theoretically  means  that  tribal nations are the third sovereign power in the US, alongside federal and state. And although federal law acknowledges the inherent sovereignty of Native nations through centuries of  treaty  relationships  and often works  in partnership with them through shared power, it is nonetheless a restricted form of sovereignty animated by imperialist legal foundations: the doctrine of discovery, domestic dependent nationhood, and the plenary power doctrine. These doctrines control Native peoples’ lives and resources via intense regulation by the United States Bureau of Indian Affairs, meaning that Native people are more legally managed

than all other people in the country, and arguably unconstitutionally contrary to the original treaty-based relationships. These are all constituent parts of what constructs the US domination-based legal paradigm.
The  domination  paradigm  is  continually  supported  by  people  invested  in maintaining power across a broad spectrum of American political interests that keep tribal governments disempowered. At the state level, vociferous grassroots antitribal sovereignty movements still work endlessly to extinguish what limited sovereignty the US legal system recognizes. For example, in Washington State the group Citizens Equal Rights Alliance (CERA)—also known as the “Ku Klux Klan of Indian country”—has led a decades-long campaign to end tribal treaty rights. The group Stand Up California actively opposes tribal gaming and led the unsuccessful  fight  against  the  Federated  Indians  of  the  Graton  Rancheria’s casino. In recent years conservative religious groups, including the Goldwater Institute in Arizona, work  to undermine the Indian Child Welfare Act, a law passed in 1978 to stop the systematic and widespread removal of Indian children from their homes and tribal cultures.
At  the  federal  level  the  strength  of  tribal  sovereignty  is  subject  to  the ideological leanings of whoever happens to be in power. When all three branches of	government—executive,	legislative,	and	judicial—are	stacked	with conservatives, we see significant threats not only  to tribes but also to issues tribes and environmentalists alike care about.7 In the Trump administration and Republican-ruled  Congress,  the  antienvironmental  sentiment  is  rampant.  In fewer  than  two  years  they  granted  the  final  permit  for  the  Dakota  Access Pipeline,   approved   the   Keystone   XL   Pipeline,   eviscerated   the   EPA  and overturned dozens of environmental protection laws, shrank Bears Ears National Monument by  90 percent, and scrubbed mention of climate change from all government   websites,   including   the   US   Federal   Emergency   Management Agency’s  (FEMA)  strategic  plan  and  the  list  of  national  security  threats.  In January 2018 the administration’s Department of the Interior drafted the largest-ever  proposal  for  offshore  oil  and  gas  lease  auctions.  And  this  is  just  the beginning. In early  2018 the New York Times identified no fewer than sixty-seven environmental  rules  the  administration rolled back  in deference  to the fossil fuel industry.8
In a neoliberal, market-fundamentalist world, a federal government controlled by  conservatives has historically  meant deregulation and the prioritization of industry  over  the  protection  of  the  environment.  For  Native  communities, conservative  governments  also represent  a  particular  threat  of  new  forms  of termination or other tactics to gut tribal sovereignty  while dressed up in the

language of liberation and improvement, as it was in the 1950s.9  As we have seen,  in times  of  extreme  political  hostility,  tribal  governments  must  remain vigilant and assert what political power they do have.


RESILIENC Y IN AC TION
We have seen how constructive alliance building is crucial in activist movements to protect against cannibalistic and predatory development. Sometimes coalitions are  ephemeral,  forming  as  the  need  arises  and  disbanding  as  campaigns  for environmental  justice  are  won  and  lost.  Others  involve  increasingly  radical partnership with local communities to form private land trusts and conservation easements. When tribal governments can, they  purchase back  ancestral lands, and if they are federally recognized, they usually have the lands transferred from fee simple to trust status, incorporating them into existing reservations.
In other cases, alternative land arrangements maintain or facilitate regaining access to dispossessed ancestral lands. As Beth Rose Middleton’s study of land trusts  notes,  private  land  trusts  are  growing  at  a  rate  far  faster  than  parks, preserves,   wilderness   areas,   and  other   methods   of   public   conservation.10 Organized as nonprofits, land trusts are used not only to conserve “wilderness” areas but also to ensure open spaces for human use. The Trust for Public Lands is one such organization that specializes in creating parks close to urban areas. It also has a Tribal and Native Lands Program that has worked with more than seventy tribes to protect more than two hundred thousand acres of ancestral land in cases where tribes are unable to acquire land in trust.11  Land trusts are often led by tribal groups—some federally recognized tribes, some not—and perhaps not surprising, are frequently found in California.
One well-known example, the Native American Land Conservancy (NALC), was initially  formed in 1997 by  Chemehuevi and Cahuilla tribal members to protect the Old Woman Mountains, a site considered sacred by Colorado River tribes in the Mojave Desert two hundred twenty miles east of Los Angeles.
As is the case with NALC, some conservancies and land partnerships focus on employing  traditional  ecological  knowledge  to  restore  damaged  ecosystems. Some, like the Maidu Summit Consortium, work within formal agreements with state and federal agencies. Though the Mountain Maidu groups are not federally recognized, tribal members organized the consortium, partnering with various institutions  like  the  US  Forest  Service,  California  Department  of  Fish  and Wildlife, and numerous other environmental groups, land trusts, and grassroots organizations to protect and rehabilitate 2,325 acres of the Humbug Valley in the

Sierra Nevada through traditional management practices.12
Tribes work with governments in other ways to preserve access to ancestral lands   out   of   tribal   control.   Since   the   1990s   tribes   have   partnered  with governments  at  all  levels  in  collaborative  land  and  watershed  management arrangements  in  projects  to  assure  access  to  and  revitalization  of  cultural resources  like  salmon and other  fisheries,  caribou,  and other  wild game  and resources. Increasingly  these collaborations incorporate traditional methods of ecological management and knowledge with conventional sustainability sciences to maintain or restore ecological integrity, but also to retain sites based on their religious significance.13  The recent controversy  over the Bears Ears National Monument in Utah is an ideal example of a site where tribes came together with the   environmental   movement   and   federal   government   in   a   productive, collaborative arrangement.
Bears  Ears  is  a  region  of  profound  sanctity  to  numerous  tribes  in  the Southwest’s Colorado Plateau, which, as we have seen, has a history of being exploited for intense mineral and fossil fuel extraction. In 2016, tribes worked with the federal government during the last days of the Obama administration to place	more	than   a	million   acres	of	spiritually,	archeologically,	and environmentally sensitive lands in monument status under the 1906 Antiquities Act.  The  monument  designation would provide  strong  protections  for  places where uranium and oil rich areas are likely to come under siege by extractive industries. The Bears Ears Intertribal Coalition consisted of the Navajo, Hopi, Zuni, Ute Mountain, and Ute Indian Tribe, with the support of at least twenty-five other tribal nations and conservation organizations. Together they worked with the administration to create an advisory commission to ensure that tribes with ancient ties to the land would have a voice in how the land is used. Other notable examples of tribes working cooperatively with the federal government to establish national monuments include Canyon de Chelly and Navajo National Monument, which are within Navajo Nation boundaries in Arizona, but Bears Ears was significant for the intertribal coalition and advisory  arrangement in addition to the sheer size of the monument.
However, the conservative Utah opposition argued that the land should remain in state control, wrongfully claiming that previously allowed public use of the land would be restricted under the new federal designation. When Republicans secured control of both the executive and legislative branches of government in 2017, the stage was set for the monument shrinking by at least 85 percent under secretary  of  the  interior  Ryan Zinke,  who was  acting  on a  Trump campaign promise. Not long after the decision was made to roll back protections for Bears

Ears, the Washington Post broke a story that Energy Fuels Resources (USA), a uranium processing company, had lobbied the administration for the monument shrinkage  from  January  until  September  of  2017,  despite  numerous  public claims by the administration that the plan was unrelated to energy or mining.14 Lawsuits   were   immediately   filed  against   various   agencies   of   the   Trump administration   (including   Trump   himself;   Ryan   Zinke,   secretary   of   the Department of the Interior; and others), challenging the legality of the move to eviscerate  the  monument,  and  as  of  this  writing  the  complaints  are  still  in litigation. The continuing Bears Ears saga stands as an example not only of how ideological   differences   between   conservatives   and   liberals   play   out   in environmental  policy   but  also  of  the  fragility   of  laws  and  other  policy frameworks that determine what happens to ancestral Indian lands due to the fickleness of the US political system.


RIGHTS OF NATURE AND C OMMUNITY RIGHTS
After decades of fighting losing battles against pollutive and damaging resource extraction projects,  communities  have  needed to pursue  alternative  routes  to environmental   protection.   Following   successes   abroad,   the   movement   to recognize  the  rights  of  nature,  and  a  related  undertaking   known  as  the Community  Rights movement, is proliferating. Both movements acknowledge the need to transform legal approaches that inevitably favor the neoliberal global economy at the expense of ecosystems.
Since  2008,  the  rights  of  nature  (RON)  approach  has  helped  activists  in Ecuador,  Bolivia,  India,  and New  Zealand imbue  nature  with legal  rights  in much the same way American courts have given rights to corporations. These laws  have  been  instrumental  in  protecting  ecosystems  inherent  in  natural landscapes like mountains and rivers. Ecuador in 2008 and Bolivia in 2009 went so far as to rewrite their national constitutions to include RON in their legal frameworks. This new language is based on Indigenous worldviews rooted in right relationship with nature and buen vivir, the good life. New Zealand (known as Aotearoa to the Maori, who are the Indigenous people of New Zealand) did not  amend  their  constitution  but  instituted  other  legal  mechanisms  to  grant personhood to the Whanganui River and Te Urewera National Parks in 2013. Following  the  Aotearoa  example,  in  2017  India  granted  personhood  to  the Ganges and Yamuna rivers.
Legal personhood means that these natural entities have the same rights as humans under national law and that humans can represent nature in the courts. As a result, tribal nations in the United States are beginning to institute rights of

nature laws in their communities. In 2016 the Ho Chunk nation in Wisconsin began amending their constitution with the mission of “giving legal standing to nature” and denying the legal personhood of any corporation or business entity that  violates  the  law.15   The  following  year  the  Ponca  Nation  of  Oklahoma, nicknamed “Earthquake Capital of the world” as a result of pervasive fracking, incorporated RON as a statute in their tribal legal code.16
Creating  RON  statutes  and  constitutional  amendments  is  a  way  for  tribal governments	to	codify	customary	law	into	Western-style	governance mechanisms  in  accordance  with  federal  Indian  law.  The  Ponca  statute,  for example, acknowledges this when it claims:

We believe that Ponca Law has always recognized Right [sic] of Nature, and therefore we resolve that the following shall be immediately recorded as the customary law of the Ponca Tribe, existing since time immemorium until the end of all days.17

The statute then lays out a list of articles clarifying what those rights are and the   penalties   for   violating   those   rights,   and   further   characterizing   those violations as misdemeanors or felonies. Even outside the RON framework, the incorporation of customary law into formal governing mechanisms transforms traditional  cultural  protocols  into enforceable  law,  enabling  the  protection of biodiversity   and  important  cultural  resources  like  plant  and  animal-based medicines.18
While tribal sovereignty can, to an extent, enable tribal communities to protect themselves  from  unwanted  corporate  encroachments  that  compromise  the environment  within  their  boundaries,  the  demonstrations  at  Standing  Rock showed that  those  boundaries  are  sometimes  contested.  Furthermore,  beyond currently recognized boundaries there is little tribal sovereignty can do to stop projects that will affect both Indigenous and non-Indigenous communities alike. RON laws are still so new in the United States that they haven’t been thoroughly tested  in  the  courts.  Questions  remain  about  whether  they  can  be  applied extrajudicially;  that  is,  outside  jurisdictions  that  enact  them,  such  as  Indian reservations.19  Relative  to nontribal  RON,  a  test-case  lawsuit  in the  state  of Colorado seeking personhood for the Colorado River was rendered incomplete in December 2017 when the attorney representing the case was threatened with sanctions and subsequently withdrew.20
In the US more than three dozen municipalities have since 2006 enacted RON laws.  But  often,  local  communities  who  attempt  to  resist  fracking,  GMO

farming, pipelines, and other environmentally offensive and health-threatening practices or attempt to institute RON laws find themselves preempted by state laws, private property laws, regulatory regimes, and corporate privilege. Both elected and appointed government officials fail to protect communities—small municipalities are sued by megacorporations for passing bans against polluting industries, and environmental lawyers are increasingly sanctioned by judges and attorneys   general.   Despite   these   challenges,   the   movement   to  strengthen community	rights	is	building,	led	by	organizations	like	Community Environmental  Legal  Defense  Fund  (CELDF),  National  Community  Rights Network,  and  Movement  Rights,  which  specializes  in  Indigenous  issues. Through  the  creation  of  formal  community  rights  networks  (CRNs),  these organizations   help   communities   to   exercise   self-governance   by   passing community bills of rights and working toward state and federal constitutional amendments that empower local self-governance. CRNs in Colorado, Hawaii, New  Hampshire,  Ohio,  Oregon,  Pennsylvania,  and  Washington  are  taking  a long-term approach to changing the status quo through various amendments to their  state  constitutions  that  would  end  state  preemption  and  challenge  the primacy of corporate “rights.” So far, no state has successfully passed one of these amendments, but in early 2018 New Hampshire became the first state to consider a community  rights amendment. Bill CACR19, the New Hampshire Community Rights Amendment, was debated in the House with fully one-third support  of  legislators,  which  is  seen  by  CELDF  as  “signifying  the  growing support for Community Rights that is building across the U.S.”21  Given this is CACR19’s  first  pass  through  the  New  Hampshire  legislature,  its  eventual success is not difficult to imagine. Strengthening community self-determination then opens a wider path to enforceable rights of nature laws, since community rights include environmental rights, such as the right to clean air and water. Greater  self-determination  and  the  freedom  from  preemption  mean  greater latitude to pass regulations that protect communities from toxic industries. As a bottom-up phenomenon, community rights start at the local level and move to the  state  and  national  levels.  Until  states  begin  enacting  community  rights amendments, municipalities and other local jurisdictions will continue to pass community rights ordinances and rights of nature laws to assert community self-determination and self-governance in defiance of the legal status quo.
The community rights movement holds promise for all kinds of populations facing exposure to toxic or otherwise undesirable development projects without their consent—especially for those communities that have traditionally sought environmental  justice:  people  of  color  and  low-income  communities.  For reservation  populations  RON  legislation  is  integral  to self-determination  and

collective  rights  and  provides  the  opportunity  to  codify  customary  law  and Indigenous worldviews of relationality  to the natural world into more formal westernized governance mechanisms. Smaller reservations and rancherias will benefit from the community rights organizing done in nearby areas beyond their control, so long as non-Native activists are conscientious in reaching out to their Indigenous neighbors by acknowledging their histories and doing the work of respectful coalition building.


OTHER PATHWAY S TO INDIGENOUS ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTIC E
Achieving true environmental justice in Indian country must ultimately engage a wide variety of strategies, from creative organizing and functional partnerships at   the   community   level   to   formal   organizing   initiatives   and   evolving environmental justice policies at the local, state, federal, and international levels that   respond   to   American   Indians’  specific   histories,   legal   statuses,   and assertions of sovereignty. As the framework of settler colonialism gains traction and becomes more widely understood and accepted in activist movements and governmental institutions there will be more opportunities for honest community dialogue and decolonizing action.
These conversations are gradually taking place. In one especially interesting example, members of a non-Native community in the original homelands of the Karuk, Yurok, Shasta, and Konomihu peoples in Northern California began a movement   to   consciously   decolonize   the   region.   They   started   a   public conversation about how to change their relationship with the Native community by  changing  their relationship with the land. Created in 2014, the Unsettling Klamath River (UKR) project began with a small group of white activists led by Laura Hurwitz, who was working on a master’s thesis that interrogated the area’s history of settler colonialism and issues of white settler responsibility. The study focused on “back-to-the-landers”—the counterculture settlers who migrated to the area and built a cannabis industry that has led to skyrocketing land values and profound ecological impacts that further alienated Indigenous peoples from their homelands in the last half century. Hurwitz, herself a white settler, posed the  question  “Back  to  whose  land?”  The  study  was  inspired  by  Unsettling Minnesota, a project begun in 2009 by Dakota and non-Dakota activists with a ten-week class titled “Dakota Decolonization: Solidarity Education for Allies,” and Unsettling  America,  a  decentralized network  of  autonomous  groups  and individuals  committed  to  “mental  and  territorial  decolonization  throughout Turtle Island and the ‘Americas.’”22
UKR identified several different portals, or openings, through which white

settlers  continued  flooding  into  the  area,  among  them  nonprofit  internships, AmeriCorps programs, the cannabis economy, and Black Bear Ranch, which is a commune established as a land trust in 1968 under the moniker “Free land for free people.”
UKR’s organizers raised tough questions about closing the portals and tearing down fences that blocked access to Indigenous sacred sites and other cultural resources, and it conducted public meetings to educate the community  about decolonization.  One  of  their  most  essential  tasks  was  to brainstorm  ways  to repatriate land, including  bringing  Native people into the land trust, creating housing for some Indigenous families, and creating a support network. Reactions to talk of decolonizing ranged from curiosity and openness to hostility and rage. Some  claimed  to  have  “saved”  the  area  due  to  their  land  stewardship  and environmental   activism,   asserting   that   their   presence   prevented   logging, pesticide  spraying,  and  other  environmental  ills,  playing  into  what  Hurwitz identified as a white savior narrative. Relationships were strained and broken, especially  at  Black  Bear  Ranch.  Hurwitz  analyzed these  responses  as  settler fragility and described debates about whether the unsettling movement should try to avoid making people “uncomfortable.” Hurwitz’s own opinion was that while  it  wasn’t  the  goal  to  hurt  loved  ones,  discomfort  with  the  topic  of decolonization is unavoidable and should be directly confronted.23
While the Unsettling Klamath River project is a work in progress and has yet to  accomplish  any  measurable  decolonizing  action,  it  did  start  a  powerful conversation—one that could potentially be replicated in other contexts. In this regard,  it  succeeded  in  metaphorically  unsettling  the  settler  population  by blowing the lid off myriad unspoken assumptions about what it means to “go back” to a land that was stolen to begin with, and it exposed the ways in which even the most progressive and antiestablishment of countercultures are rooted in white supremacy and settler privilege. By attempting to dismantle the structures of settler society, the conversation started by UKR revealed that it is not a matter of liberal versus conservative ideology but about challenging the foundation of a country built on genocide, slavery, and private property.
At  the  state  and  local  level,  new  strategies  are  being  implemented  to accomplish protection of sacred sites, and as the examples of Panhe and Genga illustrate, California is a leader in these approaches. In the East San Francisco Bay Area in 2011, a type of burial site known as a shellmound was threatened by the proposed building  of a waterfront park  on public land. It was ultimately protected through the efforts of the Yocha Dehe and Cortina Bands of Wintun Indians, who entered into a conservation and cultural easement agreement with the  city  of  Vallejo  to  protect  the  site,  known  today  by  its  traditional  name

Sogorea Te (also known as Glen Cove), setting  a precedent and providing  a blueprint for future arrangements of this kind, under California SB 18. For the first time, a tribe’s case for protecting a sacred site was bolstered by invoking the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP).24
In another promising development, in 2016 the California legislature passed AB   2616,   charging   the   Coastal   Commission   with   the   responsibility   to incorporate  an  environmental  justice  policy  framework  into  its  mandate  to protect the coast and coastal access. At the time of this writing, the commission is  consulting  with  California  tribal  people  about  what  environmental  justice means  specifically   for  them.  At  the  same  time,  the  commission  is  also developing a Tribal Consultation Policy to more clearly articulate and improve communications between tribes and the commission in “its mission to protect, maintain, and where feasible, enhance and restore the resources of California’s coast and ocean for present and future generations,” acknowledging Indigenous traditional knowledge as essential to sustainable coastline management.25 After circulating  the  Draft  Tribal  Consultation  Policy,  the  commission  solicited comments from tribes and individuals up and down the state, asking for their insights and contributions. In March 2018 the commission issued Form W6d, a twenty-four-page  compilation  of  comments  it  had  received  to  that  point, annotated  with  the  commission  staff’s  initial  responses  to  the  comments. Comments ran the gamut from suggesting relatively small changes in language to advocating for the commission to endorse broad Indigenous rights concepts, including UNDRIP, which the staff agreed with. The commission’s addition of two full paragraphs recognizing California’s colonial and genocidal history was a  direct  result  of  that  feedback.  Assuming  the  final  tribal  consultation  and environmental  justice  policies  include  these  principles  and  language,  it  will represent   a   considerable   step   forward   in   governmental   accountability   to Indigenous peoples, going much farther than the EPA’s Plan EJ 2014 reforms and   helping   to   reverse   the   pattern   of   California   Indian   erasure   at   the governmental level.
Yet, significant hurdles remain. Still to be resolved is the tension between consultation and consent  at  all  levels  of  government.  What  does  meaningful consultation look like? And what powers of recourse do tribal nations possess when insurmountable obstacles present themselves in the consultation process, especially   for   nonfederally   recognized   tribes?   The   highest   standard   for relationships between Indigenous peoples and State governments enshrined in UNDRIP is the right to free, prior, and informed consent, not just consultation. So, if local, state, and federal governments legislate the minimal principles of

tribal  consultation  and  simultaneously   endorse  UNDRIP  with  its  superior principles of free, prior, and informed consent, which values take precedence? These are questions that have not been adequately addressed in the US. As the example of Standing Rock made plain, too often the domination paradigm is the default response. Tribal rights, even those circumscribed by domestic law, are often dismissed or ignored. This leads to an even greater question: What can tribal nations realistically do in the face of a legal game that is rigged against them?
Karla General, an attorney formerly at the Indian Law Resource Center, has recommended  strategies   to  help  bring   federal   law   into  compliance   with UNDRIP.  First,  tribes  and  non-Native  advocates  can  call  on  presidents  to strengthen Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal  Governments,  to provide  for  free,  prior,  and informed  consent  as  the highest standard of consultation, which is the established guideline in the UN declaration and other human rights law obligations, such as International Labor Organization (ILO) 169.26 This measure would also require that the US support United  Nations  efforts  to  pass  protocols  to  implement  and  monitor  states’ compliance with UNDRIP, as none currently exist.27 Additionally, the US should be pressured by both internal and external parties to comply with international agreements  specific  to environmental  issues,  including  Indigenous  protection clauses like those contained in the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Rome Declaration (2009).
Second, relative to protecting sacred sites, tribal governments should call on Congress to amend the American Indian Religious Freedom Act to explicitly provide for the protection of sacred places, not just access to them.28
Another potent strategy within the power of tribal governments is to continue building intergovernmental relationships at all levels. In addition to the plethora of   examples   of   intergovernmental   cooperation   we   have   explored,   tribal governments regularly institute agreements with local governing entities, such as cross-deputation of law enforcement officers across jurisdictions. In cases when tribes have incorporated customary law and protocols based on tribal values of relatedness  to  the  natural  world  into  formal  legal  mechanisms,  enforceable environmental   protections   expand   to   include   non-Native   people   when intergovernmental arrangements are made with neighboring jurisdictions.29
Finally,   Executive   Order   12898   and   the   EPA’s   official   definition   of environmental justice should be amended to include language that acknowledges the historic, political, and cultural differences of Native peoples, acknowledges Indigenous worldviews, protects sacred sites, and admits the US’s history  of

colonization  and  genocide,  as  the  California  Coastal  Commission’s  Tribal Consultation  and  EJ  policies  did.  Indigenizing  EJ  definitions  in  these  ways would go a long way  toward meaningful accountability  and decolonizing the relationship between Native people and the United States.
As its history with American Indians has shown, the US complies with laws it makes or agrees to only haphazardly at best, and often not at all. Indians have always had to fight to defend their lives, lands, and treaties. Resistance became a way of life a long time ago; only the tactics change. The federal government has never relinquished power over Native people without a fight, and the degree to which  it  has  is  directly   attributable  to  work   initiated  by   Native  people themselves. In other words, more than any “granting” of rights by the United States, it is their bold assertions of self-determination, aided at times by powerful allies, that accounts for progress Native people have made in their relationships with the United States over the last century. Indigenous peoples have learned that no one is coming to save them, just as environmentalists have learned that their American legal system is a rigged game against the environment and their own communities.  This  is  a  pattern  engrained  by   the  forces  of  white  settler colonialism and domination paradigms, but the growing sophistication in using education, law, and politics to advance tribal self-determination will continue to build  a  wall  of  defense  against  environmentally  destructive  corporate  and government encroachments. There is no denying that the fossil fuel industry as we once knew it is dying. Even as its government puppets desperately grasp to hold on to power as the final drops of oil and gas are sucked from the Earth, the last  chunks  of  coal  are  wrenched from  the  ground,  and the  nuclear  industry continues to perpetuate the lie of its comparable cleanness, effective partnerships with allies in the environmental movement will provide the best defense for the collective   well-being   of   the   environment   and   future   generations   of   all Americans, Native and non-Native alike. In the long run, environmental justice for American Indians is environmental justice for everyone . . . and for the Earth herself.





Acknowledgments




In the journey of life there are often many roads to one destination, especially when  it  comes  to  learning  and  knowledge  production.  This  is  true  of  my experience as a scholar and writer. This book is borne from my circuitous route through  higher  education  and  the  world  of  community-engaged  Indigenous research and activism as I have struggled to link what I have often experienced as seemingly disparate worlds. When life has thrown curveballs, I have learned to adapt and use changing circumstances to my advantage, and it has taken me to unexpected places.
I was approached by my editors at Beacon Press, Gayatri Patnaik and Will Myers, with the idea to write this book soon after the publication of my first book, coauthored with Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz, “All the Real Indians Died Off” and 20 Other Myths About Native Americans. Roxanne and I were in the middle of a national book tour, and the book was enjoying great reviews and sales. At that time, November 2016, the standoff at Standing Rock was in full swing, and I had spent Thanksgiving weekend traveling there with an assignment from Indian Country  Today  Media  Network  (ICTMN).  We  had also just  experienced the national tragedy of the election of Donald Trump, which portended an ominous future in the fight to stop the Dakota Access Pipeline and for the entire planet, given the pro-fossil-fuel and climate-change-denying ideologies of Trump and his ilk. Gayatri and Will decided the time was ripe for Beacon to produce a book on Indigenous environmental justice, especially considering a relative scarcity of books on the topic.
It was a perfect project for me, because I had spent the last several years writing  about it, all through graduate school and after receiving  my  master’s degree,  and as  I  pursued a  career  as  a  researcher  and a  journalist  in Native media. I had intended to pursue a PhD but changed my mind for a variety of reasons (those pesky  curveballs), including  a move back  to coastal Southern California, the place of my birth. After graduating in 2011, I was recruited by the Center for World Indigenous Studies, where for several years I worked on many different  projects  related  to  advancing  Indigenous  self-determination,  both domestically and internationally, and have written news stories and a column for

ICTMN.
My master’s thesis was based on a case study of Panhe and its role in the 241 toll road and “saving Trestles” controversy. In the thesis, I argued that the field of environmental justice as it existed in the United States was inadequate for Indigenous  peoples,  and  it  needed  to  be  “Indigenized”  to  fit  their  unique circumstances. The day I orally defended the thesis, after a short deliberation, my  committee advisors returned to the room and informed me that it passed (with distinction), but only under one condition: that I promise to continue doing this work. This book  is thus the fulfillment of that promise. While I decided against  pursuing  a  doctorate,  I  have  nevertheless  continued my  research and writing on the topic of Indigenous environmental justice and branched out into other areas to pioneer related topics, such as understanding the relationship of surf culture to settler colonialism, which I hope will be the subject of a future book.
This book stems from and builds on my master’s thesis research project. I like to think that it is one possible version of what a PhD dissertation might have looked like, had I gone down that road. In that sense then, the book you hold in your  hands  represents  an  alternative  road  that  led  to  one  of  the  inevitable destinations on my life’s journey: a contribution to the literature on Indigenous environmental  justice.  I  would  like  to  thank  my  committee  advisors  at  the University of New Mexico, Alyosha Goldstein, Lloyd Lee, and David Correia, who oversaw my  initial work  on this project. Thanks to the entire faculty  of Native American Studies at UNM, especially Tiffany Lee, who encouraged me as a writer, and Gregory Cajete, who helped mentor me and whose brilliant work I  teach  at  California  State  University  at  San  Marcos;  and  thanks  to  Joely Proudfit, whose faith in my work brought me there. Thanks to Lydia Heberling and  Christina  Juhasz-Wood  for  reading  and  critiquing  early  chapter  drafts. Gratitude to my old friend Pennie Opal Plant for her tireless work on Indigenous environmental justice issues and to her husband, also an old friend, Michael Horse for generously  giving  of his artistic talent for the cover of this book. Thank you, Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz and Gayatri Patnaik, for bringing me into the Beacon Press family, and Will Myers for your editorial excellence, and to Joanna Green  for  stepping  into  Will’s  place.  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  Rebecca Robles and Angela Mooney D’Arcy of the United Coalition to Protect Panhe for your undying devotion to Panhe and for your support. Muchas gracias to Rudy Ryser and Leslie Korn at the Center for World Indigenous Studies for always believing in me and for your inspiration. And finally, thank you, TW, for your ongoing  support  and  love,  without  which  this  would  have  been  much  more difficult.





Notes




INTRODUC TION: THE STANDING ROC K SAGA
1. “Official Red Warrior Camp Communique,” December 15, 2016, https://redpowermedia.wordpress.com/tag/red-warrior-camp.
2. “Where Are Liquids Pipelines Located?,” Pipeline 101, source of information given as American Energy Mapping, 2013, http://www.pipeline101.com/where-are-pipelines-located.
3. “Pipelines Explained: How Safe Are America’s 2.5 Million Miles of Pipelines?” ProPublica, November 15, 2012 (updated December 6, 2016), https://www.propublica.org/article/pipelines-explained-how-safe-are-americas-2.5-million-miles-of-pipelines.
4. Philip Wight, “Down the Line: Exploring the Environmental History of Pipelines,” January 23, 2017. Excerpted from his PhD dissertation in process, “Arctic Artery: An Environmental History of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System, 1945–2012,” Brandeis University, http://niche-canada.org/2017/01/23/down-the-line-exploring-the-environmental-history-of-pipelines.
5. The #NoDAPL movement is only one part of the story of the Dakota Access Pipeline and exists within the context of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe’s legal battle to prevent its construction on tribal treaty territory. It’s an extremely complex story that does not need to be told in its entirety here. For this reason, only aspects of it that are relevant to Indigenous resistance more broadly will be recounted in this book.
6. Amy Dalrymple, “Audio: Tribe Objected to Pipeline Nearly 2 Years Before Lawsuit,” Bismarck Tribune, November 30, 2016, http://bismarcktribune.com/news/state-and-regional/audio-tribe-objected-to-pipeline-nearly-years-before-lawsuit/article_51f94b8b-1284-5da9-92ec-7638347fe066.html.
7. Amy Dalrymple, “Pipeline Route Plan First Called for Crossing North of Bismarck,” Bismarck Tribune, August 18, 2016, http://bismarcktribune.com/news/state-and-regional/pipeline-route-plan-first-called-for-crossing-north-of-bismarck/article_64d053e4-8a1a-5198-a1dd-498d386c933c.html.
8. Standing Rock Sioux Tribe v. US Army Corps of Engineers, Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, filed July 27, 2016, at Earthjustice.org, http://earthjustice.org/sites/default/files/files/3154%201%20Complaint.pdf.
9. Sarah Sunshine Manning, “And Then the Dogs Came,” This Week from Indian Country Today, Fall 2016, 14. https://ictmn.lughstudio.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/DAPL-Magazine-2016_PREVIEW_r1.pdf.
10. NYC Stands with Standing Rock, Standing Rock Syllabus, “Timeline of United States Settler Colonialism,” 2016, https://nycstandswithstandingrock.wordpress.com/standingrocksyllabus.
11. Estes, “Fighting for Our Lives.”
12. The permitting process to acquire the necessary easements through which the pipeline could cross was incremental and known as a “nationwide permit.” By the time construction had reached the edge of Lake Oahe, the final easement hadn’t yet been granted. The incremental strategy meant that the company could get away with less environmental regulation. The easements required environmental assessments, not a full environmental impact statement (EIS), per the National Environmental Protection Act. SRST believed that a full EIS should have been performed within treaty territorial boundaries, which would have meant compliance with more stringent laws regarding sacred site protection and tribal consultation.
13. To the naked eye, the region where the pipeline was designed to go appears as a desolate, deserted

landscape, but in reality it was a significant place of ceremony and prayer. A Lakota archeologist on August 29 revealed it to be an ancient burial site, which was completely missed by the North Dakota State Historic Preservation Office, which was involved with the initial environmental assessment. Upon the discovery, and seeing the construction path headed directly toward the site, but still miles away, SRST on September 2 filed an immediate injunction to halt construction. The following day—the day of the dog attacks—the company’s construction equipment showed up and bulldozed the site in what appeared to be a “willful act of treason to North Dakota preservation laws” and deliberate desecration of a burial site. Dave Archambault Sr., “Sacred Grounds Destroyed,” This Week from Indian Country Today (Fall 2016): 16, https://ictmn.lughstudio.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/DAPL-Magazine-2016_PREVIEW_r1.pdf.
14. On September 9, 2016, only moments after a federal judge denied granting a temporary injunction to halt construction, the Departments of the Army, Interior, and Justice issued a joint statement that the Army Corps would not authorize construction pending a review of current laws, statutes, and practices for infrastructure projects like DAPL, and they requested the company voluntarily stop construction.
15. ICTMN staff, “Breaking: Dakota Access Lake Oahe Work Stopped Pending Standing Rock Sioux Appeal,” Indian Country Media Network, September 17, 2016, https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/news/politics/breaking-dakota-access-lake-oahe-work-stopped-pending-standing-rock-sioux-appeal.
16. “Timeline of Events,” Earthjustice, latest update August 31, 2018, http://earthjustice.org/features/faq-standing-rock-litigation.
17. In July of 2018 Lakota People’s Law Project announced that the North Dakota attorney general’s office determined that the Dakota Access Pipeline never legally acquired title to the ranchland that water protectors were camped on, effectively nullifying the many trespassing charges that had been brought against the water protectors.
18. Indigenous Environmental Network, “Citing 1851 Treaty, Water Protectors Establish Road Blockade and Expand Frontline #NoDAPL Camp,” Indian Country Media Network, October 24, 2016, https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/news/native-news/citing-1851-treaty-water-protectors-establish-road-blockade-and-expand-frontline-nodapl-camp.
19. Theresa Braine, “Conflicting Accounts Emerge After Treaty Camp Police Action,” Indian Country Media Network, October 28, 2016, https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/news/native-news/conflicting-accounts-emerge-after-treaty-camp-police-action.
20. “Police and Military Attack Oceti Sakowin Treaty Camp,” Unicorn Riot, October 27, 2016, http://www.unicornriot.ninja/?p=10476.
21. Steve Russell, “Patriots Acquitted in Malheur as DAPL Water Protectors Get Maced,” Indian Country Media Network, October 28, 2016, https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/news/native-news/patriots-acquitted-in-malheur-as-dapl-water-protectors-get-maced.
22. “Standing Rock: 100+ Injured After Police Attack with Water Cannons, Rubber Bullets and Mace,” Democracy Now, November 21, 2016, https://www.democracynow.org/2016/11/21/headlines/standing_rock_100_injured_after_police_attack_with_
23. Christine Hauser, “Obama Says Alternate Routes Are Being Reviewed for Dakota Pipeline,” New York Times, November 2, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/03/us/president-obama-says-engineers-considering-alternate-route-for-dakota-pipeline.html.
24. Harper Neidig, “Clinton Campaign Urges Both Sides in Dakota Protests to Work Out Solution,” The Hill (blog), October 27 2016, https://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/news/303211-clinton-campaign-urges-both-sides-in-dakota-protests-to-work.
25. Lauren McCauley, “‘What a Crock’: Clinton Breaks DAPL Silence with Statement That Says ‘Literally Nothing,’” Common Dreams, October 28, 2016, http://www.commondreams.org/news/2016/10/28/what-crock-clinton-breaks-dapl-silence-statement-says-literally-nothing.
26. “CEO Confident Dakota Access Pipeline Will Be Completed Under Trump Presidency,” CBS News, November 11, 2016, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/dakota-access-pipeline-energy-transfer-partners-ceo-

kelcy-warren-breaks-silence.
27. Caroline Kenny, Gregory Krieg, Sara Sidner, and Max Blau, “Dakota Access Pipeline to Be Rerouted,” CNN, December 5, 2016, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/dakota-access-pipeline-energy-transfer-partners-ceo-kelcy-warren-breaks-silence.
28. Athena Jones, Jeremy Diamond and Gregory Krieg, “Trump Advances Controversial Oil Pipelines with Executive Action,” CNN, January 24, 2017, https://www.cnn.com/2017/01/24/politics/trump-keystone-xl-dakota-access-pipelines-executive-actions/index.html.
29. ICMN Staff, “‘Absolutely False’: No Contact from Trump Administration, Archambault Says,” Indian Country Media Network, February 24, 2017, https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/news/politics/archambault-false-no-contact-trump/? mqsc=ED3873590.
30. About the relationship of water to the Lakota people, Edward Valandra wrote, “The mainstream public sees ours as an environmental action: when an oil pipeline fails, the spill contaminates the water, rendering it unsafe to drink. ‘Mni Wiconi—Water Is Life!’also calls to the fact that all life would die without clean water. Protecting water from contamination falls within the environmental paradigm, and therefore becomes a universal aspiration. However, Phil Wambli Numpa, the Sicangu Lakota Treaty Council’s executive director, pushed beyond Western environmental, racial, and development paradigms. He explains that ‘water is alive: we call it mni wiconi, water is life.’That water is alive—and therefore possesses personality or personhood—defines our cultural response to the DAPL. Our definition challenges the West’s anthropocentrism, which accords person/peoplehood only to humans. Hence, the Western way of life would both deny and defy water as having personhood. Yet the United States can arbitrarily recognize fictional entities like corporations as legal persons, while denying personhood to humans who become subject to the Thirteenth Amendment’s slavery exception.” Edward Valandra, “We Are Blood Relatives: No to the DAPL,” Hot Spots, Cultural Anthropology website, December 22, 2016, https://culanth.org/fieldsights/1023-we-are-blood-relatives-no-to-the-dapl.



C HAPTER ONE: ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTIC E THEORY AND ITS LIMITATIONS FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES

1. “Environmental Justice History,” Energy.gov, https://energy.gov/lm/services/environmental-justice/environmental-justice-history, accessed March 9, 2017.
2. US General Accounting Office, Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills and Their Correlation with Racial and Economic Status of Surrounding Communities (Washington, DC: GAO, 1983).
3. The term “uncontrolled toxic waste sites” was defined as “closed and abandoned sites on the EPA’s list of sites which pose a present and potential threat to human health and the environment.” While statistics were gathered for Native Americans in communities with uncontrolled toxic waste sites, it appears that the study did not count abandoned uranium mines in the Southwest or on reservations in other regions—which number in the thousands—or uranium enrichment facilities, such as the Hanford site in Washington State, which has been known for decades to be leaking radioactive waste in the surrounding area and into the Columbia River. If these had been factored in, it is reasonable to assume the numbers would have been higher for the American Indian demographic.
4. Pulido, Environmentalism and Economic Justice.
5. Principles of Environmental Justice, adopted at the First National People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit, Washington, DC, October 24–27, 1991, http://www.ejnet.org/ej/principles.html.
6. “Environmental Justice: Timeline,” A Voice: African American Voices in Congress, http://www.avoiceonline.org/environmental/timeline.html, accessed October 1, 2018.
7. Mike Ewall, “Legal Tools for Environmental Equity vs. Environmental Justice,” Sustainable Development Law and Policy 13, no. 1 (2012–13), http://www.ejnet.org/ej/SDLP_Ewall_Article.pdf.
8. “Learn About Environmental Justice,” Environmental Justice, Environmental Protection Agency website, https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice/learn-about-environmental-justice, accessed October 23, 2018.
9. Cutter, “Race, Class, and Environmental Justice.” 10. “Learn About Environmental Justice,” EPA.
11. US Commission on Civil Rights, Not in My Backyard: Executive Order 12898 and Title VI as Tools for Achieving Environmental Justice, chap. 1, http://www.usccr.gov/pubs/envjust/ch1.htm, accessed March 10, 2017.
12. US Commission on Civil Rights, Environmental Justice.
13. Devon J. Peña, “Toward an Environmental Justice Act,” March 2, 2011, http://www.newclearvision.com/2011/03/02/toward-an-environmental-justice-act.
14. Clifford Rechtschaffen, Eileen Gauna, and Catherine A. O’Neill, “Introduction: History of the Movement,” in Rechtschaffen, Gauna, and O’Neill, Environmental Justice: Law, Policy & Regulation (Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2009).
15. Gross and Stretesky, “Environmental Justice in the Courts,” 205–32.
16. Ewall, “Legal Tools for Environmental Equity vs. Environmental Justice.” 17. Cutter, “Race, Class, and Environmental Justice.”
18. Ibid.
19. Pulido, Environmentalism and Economic Justice.
20. See Kosek, Understories. For more on land grant issues, see, for example, María E. Montoya, Translating Property: The Maxwell Land Grant and the Conflict over Land in the American West, 1840– 1900 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002).
21. Eric Cheyfitz convincingly argues, however, that the material promises of liberal democracy have collapsed in a rhetoric of disinformation, because economic equality has deliberately been left out of the constitutional and legal framework of the United States. See Cheyfitz, The Disinformation Age.
22. Schlosberg, “Reconceiving Environmental Justice,” 518.

23. Standing Rock Sioux tribal chairman Dave Archambault appealed to the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva in September 2016, and UN officials later visited the protest camps. Several high-ranking officials denounced the human rights abuses, referring to them as “inhuman and degrading conditions.” Max Bearak, “U.N. Officials Denounce ‘Inhuman’Treatment of Native American Pipeline Protestors,” Washington Post, November 15, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2016/11/15/u-n-officials-denounce-inhuman-treatment-of-north-dakota-pipeline-protesters/?utm_term=.8f6a14f1b906. It was unclear why SRST focused their efforts on human rights abuses without interrogating the United States’violation of the free, prior, and informed consent clause of UNDRIP.
24. Schlosberg, “Reconceiving Environmental Justice.”
25. Karl Marx, “Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist,” chap. 31 in Capital, Volume One: A Critique of Political Economy, 1867.
26. Wolfe, “Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native.”
27. Several Native scholars have pointed out the hegemonic nature of State recognition of tribal nations. See, for example, Glen Coulthard, Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics of Recognition (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014), and Audra Simpson, Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life Across Borders of Settler States (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2014).
28. For in-depth critical analysis of Indigenous sovereignty, see especially Taiaiake Alfred, Peace, Power, Righteousness: An Indigenous Manifesto (Ontario: Oxford University Press, 1999); Joanne Barker, ed., Sovereignty Matters: Locations of Contestation and Possibility in Indigenous Struggles for Self-Determination (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2005); and Scott Richard Lyons, X-marks: Native Signatures of Assent (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010). For more on the paradigm of domination, see Newcomb, Pagans in the Promised Land.
29. Anne Bonds and Joshua Inwood, “Beyond White Privilege: Geographies of White Supremacy and Settler Colonialism,” Progress in Human Geography 40, no. 6 (November 2015): 715.
30. Norman K. Denzin and Yvonna S. Lincoln, preface to Denzin, Lincoln, and Smith, Handbook of Critical and Indigenous Methodologies, x.
31. Franke Wilmer, The Indigenous Voice in World Politics (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1993), quoted in Smith, Decolonizing Methodologies, III. In mainstream economics, economic surplus is the net gain between the cost of production and the selling price of goods. Similarly, but in Marxist terms, “surplus value” is the core value or goal of capitalism and cannot be separated from private property and worker exploitation.
32. See Andrea Smith, “Heteropatriarchy and the Three Pillars of White Supremacy: Rethinking Women of Color Organizing,” in Women in Culture: An Intersectional Anthology for Gender and Women’s Studies, ed. Bonnie Kime Scott, Susan E. Cayleff, Anne Donadey, and Irene Lara (Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2016), 404.
33. Wanda McCaslin and Denise C. Breton, “Justice as Healing: Going Outside the Colonizers Cage,” in Denzin, Lincoln, and Smith, Handbook of Critical and Indigenous Methodologies, 512.
34. Ibid.
35. Kyle Powys Whyte, “Indigenous Experience, Environmental Justice, and Settler Colonialism” (April 25, 2016), SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2770058 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2770058.
36. Some scholars have referred to Indigenous cultural difference as the “cultural dilemma.” See Ranco et al., “Environmental Justice, American Indians and the Cultural Dilemma.”
37. Federal Indian policy is grounded in several principles that form the core of federal Indian law, with the trust responsibility as one of the bedrock legal principles. The often-controversial trust doctrine holds that the federal government serves as the trustee for Indian reservation lands and assets, to whom the government is legally and morally accountable. For an excellent discussion on the trust doctrine, see David E. Wilkins and K. Tsianina Lomawaima, Uneven Ground: American Indian Sovereignty and Federal Indian Law (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2001).
38. Indigenous Peoples Work Group, Recommendations for Fostering Environmental Justice for Tribes

and Indigenous Peoples, 1, 12, https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice/recommendations-fostering-environmental-justice-tribes-and-indigenous-peoples, accessed April 11, 2017.
39. See Policy on Environmental Justice for Working with Federally Recognized Tribes and Indigenous Peoples, https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015–02/documents/ej-indigenous-policy.pdf, accessed April 13, 2017.
40. Ibid., 6.
41. See Announcement of U.S. Support for the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Initiatives to Promote the Government-to-Government Relationship and Improve the Lives of Indigenous Peoples, https://2009-2017.state.gov/documents/organization/154782.pdf, accessed October 8, 2018.
42. Ibid., 3. There is a growing body of literature on the meaning of self-determination in UNDRIP, and contrary to the Obama administration’s definitive claim that the declaration created a new definition for the concept, there is much disagreement about this. It stands to reason that if this were the case, and a new definition of self-determination was reserved for Indigenous peoples living under conditions of State domination, then the US (and Canada, New Zealand, and Australia) would not have been so reluctant to endorse the declaration to begin with. The administration’s position is thus a revisionist version that doesn’t accurately reflect the declaration’s intent.
43. The term “benevolent supremacy,” describing US foreign policy in the Middle East, was coined by Melani McAlister in her book Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle East Since 1945, updated ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005).



C HAPTER TWO: GENOC IDE BY ANY OTHER NAME
1. Andrew Jackson: “Fifth Annual Message,” December 3, 1833, The American Presidency Project, https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/node/200846, accessed October 23, 2018.
2. Quoted in Peter Nabokov, Native American Testimony: A Chronicle of Indian-White Relations from Prophecy to the Present, 1492–1992 (New York: Penguin, 1992), 151–52.
3. The concept of deracination—literally, to pull up by the roots—has been applied by Indigenous scholars as an apt metaphor for describing the process of land dispossession.
4. Vickery and Hunter, “Native Americans: Where in Environmental Justice Research?” 5. Lord and Shutkin, “Environmental Justice and the Use of History.”
6. Vickery and Hunter, “Native Americans: Where in Environmental Justice Research?”
7. US Supreme Court justice Clarence Thomas in particular has critiqued the complexity of federal Indian law several times. But as at least one commentator noted, when court justices critique the “complexity” of federal Indian law, it seems to precede a restriction on tribal authority. Matthew L. M. Fletcher, “Commentary on ‘Confusion’and ‘Complexity’in Indian Law (Updated with Blake Watson Materials),” Turtle Talk (blog), Indigenous Law and Policy Center, Michigan State University College of Law, May 2, 2011, https://turtletalk.wordpress.com/2011/05/02/commentary-on-confusion-and-complexity-in-indian-law.
8. For more on the racist underpinnings of the Supreme Court’s Indian law decisions, see Robert A. Williams, Like a Loaded Weapon: The Rehnquist Court, Indian Rights, and the Legal History of Racism in America (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2005).
9. Whyte, “Indigenous Experience, Environmental Justice and Settler Colonialism.”
10. At least one scholar (who specializes in environmental jurisprudence and Indigenous peoples) has used the phrase in this way. In her book Environmental Justice and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: International and Domestic Legal Perspectives, Laura Westra articulates the idea of environmental deprivation, connecting it to genocide (174).
11. The inherent contradiction of a landscape populated by “wild” Indians versus a virgin wilderness can be seen as a reflection of the historical ambivalence of European settlers’relationship to Indigenous peoples. Referencing the work of early American writers like D. H. Lawrence (and others), Dakota scholar Philip Deloria wrote of this American ambivalence in his 1998 book Playing Indian. He explained that Americans were torn between their desire to be like Indians, who represented perfect freedom and an authentic connection to the continent on one hand and the need to extirpate them on the other (3). Virgin wilderness narratives are a way to discursively eliminate Indigenous peoples from the land as a form of erasure or extirpation.
12. Dunbar-Ortiz, An Indigenous Peoples’History of the United States, 41. 13. Ibid., 61–62.
14. James F. Brooks, Captives and Cousins: Slavery, Kinship, and Community in the Southwest Borderlands (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002).
15. See Brett Rushforth, Bonds of Alliance: Indigenous and Atlantic Slaveries in New France (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 2012).
16. Other important Indian slavery studies include Allan Gallay, The Indian Slave Trade: The Rise of the English Empire in the American South, 1670–1717 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2012), and Margaret Ellen Newell, Brethren by Nature: New England Indians, Colonists, and the Origins of American Slavery (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2015).
17. Reséndez, The Other Slavery, 266.
18. See, for example, Lindsay, Murder State; Benjamin Madley, An American Genocide: The United States and the California Indian Catastrophe (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2016); and George Harwood Phillips, “Indians in Los Angeles, 1781–1875: Economic Integration, Social Disintegration,”

Pacific Historical Review 49, no. 3 (August 1980): 427–51. 19. Lindsay, Murder State, 27.
20. See Kimberley Johnson-Dodds, “Early California Laws and Policies Related to California Indians,” California Research Bureau, 2002, https://www.library.ca.gov/crb/02/14/02–014.pdf.
21. Lindsay, Murder State, 154. 22. Ibid., 157.
23. Reséndez, The Other Slavery, 284. 24. Ibid., 294.
25. The Treaty of New Echota, which traded all Cherokee land east of the Mississippi River in exchange for money and an equal amount of land in the Oklahoma Territory, was controversial because it had been negotiated by a group under the leadership of John Ridge, who wrongly claimed to represent the Cherokee Nation. In retaliation, other Cherokees assassinated Ridge and two other treaty negotiators in 1839, the year after the final march of the Cherokees.
26. Clara Sue Kidwell, The Effects of Removal on American Indian Tribes, http://nationalhumanitiescenter.org/tserve/nattrans/ntecoindian/essays/indianremoval.htm, accessed October 8, 2018.
27. The reservation system itself can be seen as a tactic of genocide. They were much smaller than what was needed to support those who depended on subsistence lifestyles. Off-reservation hunting was necessary due to constant shortages of government food rations and was severely punished. The passage of the Dawes Act in 1887 placed even greater strains on Indians with the legalized theft of two-thirds of treaty-reserved lands, which contributed to conditions of starvation and malnutrition.
28. For more on the history of Round Valley, see for example, Lynwood Carranco and Estle Beard, Genocide and Vendetta: The Round Valley Wars in Northern California (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1981); William J. Bauer, We Were All Like Migrant Workers Here: Work, Community, and Memory on California’s Round Valley Reservation (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009); Frank H. Baumgardner, Killing for Land in Early California: Indian Blood at Round Valley (New York: Algora, 2006).
29. Whyte, “Indigenous Experience, Environmental Justice and Settler Colonialism.”
30. The Medicine Lodge Treaty was contested by leaders and members of the various bands, having not been ratified by three-quarters of the male population as required, rendering it invalid. The tribes were moved anyway, and a lawsuit was filed and decided in the Supreme Court in 1903. The notorious decision in Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock ruled in favor of the federal government. While the court admitted the tribes never appropriately ceded their lands, it also said that Congress always held the political power to act unilaterally. This was the precedent that articulated the plenary power doctrine, in which Congress is deemed to hold ultimate authority over Indian nations and is one of the bedrock principles in federal Indian law today.
31. Much of the Malheur reservation later became the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge and was the site of the Bundy standoff against federal marshals in 2016. The Bundys were acquitted by a federal jury on October 27, 2016, the same day of the first militarized attacks on the 1851 Treaty Camp at Standing Rock.
32. Donald Fixico, Termination and Relocation: Federal Indian Policy, 1945–1960 (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1986).
33. Lawrence William Gross, “The Comic Vision of Anishinaabe Culture and Religion,” American Indian Quarterly 26, no. 3 (2002): 436–59. Native studies professor Cutcha Risling Baldy even teaches courses using zombie apocalypse movies to illustrate to non-Natives what it feels like to be a Native living in a postapocalyptic world. See her blog Why I Teach the Walking Dead in My Native Studies Classes, April 24, 2014, https://thenerdsofcolor.org/2014/04/24/why-i-teach-the-walking-dead-in-my-native-studies-classes.
34. Scholars have debated the original indigenous population for decades. Here I rely on Henry F. Dobyns’s figures. See “Estimating Aboriginal American Population: An Appraisal of Techniques with a New Hemispheric Estimate,” Current Anthropology 7 (1966): 295–416, and “Reply,” 440–44. See also

Dobyns, Native American Historical Demography: A Critical Bibliography (Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1976), 1; and Their Number Become Thinned: Native American Population Dynamics in Eastern North America (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press/Newberry Library, 1983), 2.
35. Yuchi Muscogee scholar Daniel Wildcat contends that many Native people were and are subject to four distinct removals. The first removal was physical removal from homelands, the second occurred with the removal of children from their homes during the boarding-school era, the third removal was the psychocultural removal of Indian identities in the boarding schools (the embodiment of cultural genocide, he says), and some will experience a fourth removal as their homes become uninhabitable due to sea-level rise and other environmental disruptions due to climate change. See Wildcat, Red Alert.
36. See, for example, Kathleen Brown-Rice, “Examining the Theory of Historical Trauma Among Native Americans,” Professional Counselor 3, no. 3 (2013); M. Brave Heart, J. Chase, J. Elkins, and D. B. Altschul, “Historical Trauma Among Indigenous Peoples of the Americas: Concepts, Research, and Clinical Considerations,” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 43, no. 4 (2011); M. Y. H. Brave Heart and L. M. DeBruyn, “The American Indian Holocaust: Healing Historical Unresolved Grief,” American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research (1998); Eduardo Duran, Healing the Soul Wound: Counseling with American Indians and Other Native Peoples (New York: Teachers College Press, 2006).
37. See Public Law 103–150 (1993), a joint resolution apologizing for the overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom government, and an apology resolution toward Native Americans buried deep within the 2010 Defense Appropriations Act, H.R. 3326, Public Law No. 111–118.
38. Wolfe, “Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native,” 403.
39. See full text at “Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,” July 17, 1998, http://legal.un.org/icc/statute/99_corr/cstatute.htm, accessed October 23, 2018.
40. Office of the UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, “Analysis Framework,” 3, http://www.un.org/ar/preventgenocide/adviser/pdf/osapg_analysis_framework.pdf.
41. McDonnell and Moses, “Raphael Lemkin as Historian of Genocide in the Americas,” 514. 42. Card, “Genocide and Social Death.”



C HAPTER THREE: THE C OMPLIC ATED LEGAC Y OF WESTERN EXPANSION AND THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

1. Nabokov, Native American Testimony.
2. “About My Gas Mask Paintings . . . via the Official Blog of Bunky Echo Hawk,” March 14, 2014, archived at https://lucian.uchicago.edu/blogs/atomicage/2015/09/03/about-my-gas-mask-paintings-via-the-official-blog-of-bunky-echo-hawk/, accessed October 25, 2018.
3. Clint Carroll, Roots of Our Renewal: Ethnobotany and Cherokee Environmental Governance (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015).
4. Quoted in Newcomb, Pagans in the Promised Land, 76. Scholars generally agree that the intent of the Johnson case was to establish clarity in American land acquisition law by addressing what turned out to be a manufactured and collusive dispute between two white men to defraud the court, not primarily to establish a basis for federal Indian law. As legal scholar Lindsay Robertson asserted, what should have been a much simpler, concise decision turned into a complex affair involving peripheral questions about Indians, with ultimately tragic consequences for them. For a case study on the legal fraud of the decision, see Robertson’s Conquest by Law: How the Discovery of America Dispossessed Indigenous Peoples of Their Lands (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005).
5. The origin of the term “Manifest Destiny” is typically attributed to an 1845 editorial in the United States Magazine and Democratic Review—an organ of the Democratic Party—by the publication’s editor, John O’Sullivan. Discussing the US and Great Britain’s dispute over the Oregon Territory, O’Sullivan wrote that “the right of our manifest destiny [is] to overspread and to possess the whole of the continent which Providence has given us for the development of the great experiment of liberty and federated self-government entrusted to us.”
6. Papal bulls are edicts or public decrees delivered by the pope.
7. For a more in-depth discussion of Story’s opinion, see Newcomb, Pagans in the Promised Land, 81– 85.
8. Ibid., 23–36.
9. Modern Native scholars have identified numerous popular culture representations that arose in the latter nineteenth century, perpetuating the myth of the vanishing Indian. It laments the inevitable demise of the “dying race” of American Indians and the purity of their cultures. See Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz and Dina Gilio-Whitaker, “All the Real Indians Died Off” and 20 Other Myths About Native Americans (Boston: Beacon Press, 2016).
10. Elliott West, “American Indians and the Transcontinental Railroad,” Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History, https://ap.gilderlehrman.org/history-by-era/development-west/essays/american-indians-and-trans continental-railroad, accessed October 8, 2018.
11. The growing harshness of the treaties is reflected in treaty language, as analyzed by a Princeton University study. Treaties were made with tribes until 1871 when Congress removed the president’s ability to negotiate treaties with the Nations. Negotiations continued, however, in the form of ratified “agreements”; while they differed little in effect, they nonetheless “ushered in an aggressive new regime of conquest and ruin for native peoples.” Arthur Spirling, “US Treaty-Making with American Indians: Institutional Change and Relative Power, 1784–1911,” January 11, 2011, 6, https://www.princeton.edu/~pcglobal/conferences/methods/papers/Spirling.pdf.
12. Report of Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman, in Report of the Secretary of War, 1883, 48th Cong., 1st sess., House Executive Document 1, Pt. 2, Serial 2182, quoted in West, “American Indians and the Transcontinental Railroad.”
13. William G. Thomas III, “How the Railroads Took Native American Lands in Kansas,” December 11, 2010, http://railroads.unl.edu/blog/?p=125.
14. “Extermination of Buffalo,” Enclopedia.com, http://www.encyclopedia.com/history/encyclopedias-

almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/buffalo-extermination, accessed October 8, 2018.
15. Theodore Steinberg, quoted in David P. Billington, Donald C. Jackson, and Martin V. Melosi, “The History of Large Federal Dams: Planning, Design, and Construction in the Era of Big Dams,” US Department of the Interior Bureau of Reclamation, 2005, 2, https://www.usbr.gov/history/HistoryofLargeDams/LargeFederalDams.pdf.
16. Jerilyn Church, Chinyere O. Ekechi, Aila Hoss, and Anika Jade Larson, “Tribal Water Rights: Exploring Dam Construction in Indian Country,” Journal of Law, Medicine, and Ethics 43 no. 1 (Spring 2015): 60–63, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4699571.
17. “Environmental Impacts of Dams,” International Rivers, https://www.internationalrivers.org/environmental-impacts-of-dams, accessed October 8, 2018.
18. Celia McMichael, Jon Barnett, and Anthony McMichael, “An Ill Wind? Climate Change, Migration, and Health,” Environmental Health Perspectives 120, no. 5 (May 2012): 646–54, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3346786.
19. Pierini, “How Did the Hetch Hetchy Project Impact Native Americans?”
20. “Columbia River Treaty Fishing Access Sites Oregon and Washington Fact-Finding Review on Tribal Housing Final Report,” Cooper Zietz Engineers, Inc., for Portland District US Army Corps of Engineers, November 19, 2013, https://www.eenews.net/assets/2015/12/21/document_daily_01.pdf.
21. White, The Organic Machine.
22. Ken Kesey’s classic 1962 book One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest is a testament to this trauma in the character of Chief Broom Bromden, the protagonist through whose perspective the story is told. As an Indigenous person of the Columbia River, Broom’s mental illness is directly connected to the drowning of Celilo Falls and the interruption of the ancient fishing cultures of the Yakama, Umatilla, Walla Walla, and other related Columbia River peoples. For an analysis of this perspective, see Leise, “Ken Kesey’s One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest,” 62–79. For more on the cultural impacts of Columbia River damming, also see Barber, Death of Celilo Falls.
23. In 1992, Congress approved the restoration of the Elwha River through the Elwha River Ecosystem and Fisheries Restoration Act. By 2014 both the Elwha and Glines Canyon Dams were removed. A similar initiative is taking place on the Klamath River, with the scheduled removal of four dams.
24. “Revisiting the Reign of Terror,” CBS News, April 30, 2017, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/killers-of-the-flower-moon-revisiting-the-reign-of-terror-on-the-osage-nation.
25. Voyles, Wastelanding.
26. Grinde and Johansen, Ecocide of Native America, 208. 27. Ibid., 214.
28. “Justice Department Surpasses $2 Billion in Awards Under the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act,” Kayenta Today, March 2, 2015, http://www.kayentatownship-nsn.gov/blog/?p=5624.
29. Voyles, Wastelanding.
30. LaDuke, “Indigenous Environmental Perspectives.”
31. Terri Hansen, “Northern Cheyenne Sue to Block Coal Mining on Public Lands,” Indian Country Today, April 14, 2017, https://newsmaven.io/indiancountrytoday/archive/northern-cheyenne-sue-to-block-coal-mining-on-public-lands-hPtxUVh1_0GncLXXPSQ9MA.
32. Michelle Tolson, “Yakama Nation Fights for Nuclear Waste Cleanup at Hanford Site,” Earth Island Journal, May 21, 2014, http://www.earthisland.org/journal/index.php/elist/eListRead/yakama_nation_fights_for_nuclear_waste_clea
33. La Duke, “Indigenous Environmental Perspectives.”
34. Moore-Nall, “The Legacy of Uranium Development on or near Indian Reservations and Health Implications Rekindling Public Awareness.” This is an excellent synopsis of all the uranium mine sites in Indian country.
35. Terri Hansen, “Kill the Land, Kill the People: There Are 532 Superfund Sites in Indian Country!,” Indian Country Today, June 17, 2014, https://newsmaven.io/indiancountrytoday/archive/kill-the-land-kill-the-people-there-are-532-superfund-sites-in-indian-country-LpCDfEqzlkGEnzyFxHYnJA.

36. See Grinde and Johansen, Ecocide of Native America.
37. Short, Redefining Genocide. In a collection of case studies, Short highlights the example of the Alberta tar sands development as a clear case of the connection between ecocide, genocide, and bottom of the barrel energy development.
38. Sherry L. Smith and Brian Frehner, introduction to Smith and Frehner, Indians and Energy, 8. 39. Ibid.
40. Melissa K. Nelson, “Introduction: Lighting the Sun of Our Future—How These Teachings Can Provide Illumination,” in Nelson, Original Instructions, 3.
41. Clayton Thomas-Muller, “Front Line of Resistance: Indigenous Peoples and Energy Development,” in Nelson, Original Instructions, 239–46.
42. Rebecca Tsosie, “Cultural Sovereignty and Tribal Energy Development: Creating a Land Ethic for the Twenty-First Century,” in Smith and Frehner, Indians & Energy, 263–79.
43. After years of intense protests by Navajo activists, the ill-fated Desert Rock plant was never built. The Navajo Nation does, however, own the Navajo Generating Station, a 2,200-megawatt coal-fired power plant in conjunction with the Bureau of Land Management and is supplied by Peabody Energy’s Kayenta Mine. The aging power plant narrowly averted a shutdown by the EPA in 2017 for its inability to meet regulations limiting nitrogen oxide emissions, but its lease was extended until 2019. As of this writing the plant’s future is uncertain.
44. Title 4, chapter 9 of the Navajo Nation Code Is the Environmental Policy Act. The cornerstone of the policy implies the Fundamental Law without directly naming it as such, whereby “the protection, restoration and preservation of the environment is a central component of the philosophy of the Navajo Nation . . . and that it is the policy of the Navajo Nation to use all practicable means to create and maintain conditions under which humankind and nature can exist in productive harmony.” See http://www.navajonationepa.org/Pdf%20files/NN%20EnvPolicy.pdf.
45. Even after the EPA granted permits, the ill-fated power plant for years fought an uphill battle due to opposition from the state of New Mexico because of the environmental impact of yet another coal plant in the region, opposition from the neighboring Mountain Ute tribe, and legal challenges to the permit by the Sierra Club and its allies. Among its allies was the group Diné Citizens Against Ruining Our Environment (CARE).
46. Tsosie, “Cultural Sovereignty and Tribal Energy Development,” 278.



C HAPTER FOUR: FOOD IS MEDIC INE, WATER IS LIFE
1. Here I defer to the spelling used by the famous Colville novelist and activist Christine Quintasket, also known as Mourning Dove, in Mourning Dove: A Salishan Autobiography (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press: 1990).
2. Vanessa Ho, “Native American Death Rates Soar as Most People Are Living Longer,” Seattle Post Intelligencer, March 11, 2009, http://www.seattlepi.com/local/article/Native-American-death-rates-soar-as-most-people-1302192.php.
3. Although an analysis of the federal Indian Health Service is beyond the scope of this chapter, it’s important to point out that federal neglect most commonly takes the form of chronic underfunding of IHS. Health care for American Indians has been affirmed time and again, beginning in the early twentieth century, as a trust responsibility that descends from the hundreds of treaties the US made with tribal nations in exchange for land. But the agency has never been adequately funded to meet the needs of Indian country, as was starkly revealed in a 2003 study commissioned by the US Commission on Civil Rights, “A Quiet Crisis: Federal Funding and Unmet Needs in Indian Country.”
4. “Disparities,” Indian Health Service Fact Sheet, https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/factsheets/disparities/, accessed October 8, 2018.
5. “Disparities,” Indian Health Service Fact Sheet, https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/factsheets/disparities/, accessed October 8, 2018.
6. “Changing the Course of Diabetes: Turning Hope into Reality,” Indian Health Service, Special Diabetes Program for Indians, 2014 Report to Congress,
https://www.ihs.gov//newsroom/includes/themes/responsive2017/display_objects/documents/RepCong_2016 7. “Diné Food Sovereignty: A Report on the Navajo Nation Food System and the Case to Rebuild a Self-
Sufficient Food System for the Diné People,” Diné Policy Institute, April 2014, 52, http://www.dinecollege.edu/institutes/DPI/Docs/dpi-food-sovereignty-report.pdf.
8. Clint R. Carroll, Carolyn Noonan, Eva M. Garroutte, Ana Navas-Acien, Steven P. Verney, and Dedra Buchwald, “Low-Level Inorganic Arsenic Exposure and Neuropsychological Functioning in American Indian Elders,” Environmental Research 156 (July 2017), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013935116305321.
9. Cay Leytham-Powell, “Trace Arsenic Linked with Deteriorating Health Among American Indian Elders,” Colorado Arts and Sciences Magazine, August 25, 2017, https://www.colorado.edu/asmagazine/2017/08/25/trace-arsenic-linked-deteriorating-health-among-american-indian-elders.
10. In addition to health disparities, Native Americans consistently rank at the top of all social ills, including poverty, violence against women, police murder rates, youth suicide, and education levels.
11. Whyte, “Indigenous Food Systems, Environmental Justice, and Settler-Industrial States.”
12. Depopulation due to disease is not thought to be a result of poor health. On the contrary, it was the absence of certain diseases on the continent that led to death from previously unencountered contagions. Having not been exposed to microbes that caused influenza, measles, small pox, and a host of other diseases, Indian bodies did not possess the antibodies to fight what were common illnesses among Europeans. Some studies in American Indian health disparities, however, note the presence of diseases like pneumonia and tuberculosis in pre-Columbian America and have claimed that American Indian health has always exhibited disparities compared to Europeans, even before their arrival, and problematically posit genetic determinism as a possibility.
13. Gregory Cajete, “Indigenous Foods, Indigenous Health: A Pueblo Perspective,” in Cajete, A People’s Ecology.
14. Ibid., 87–89. 15. Ibid., 95.

16. When Pueblo people talk about corn, they are talking about “Indian” corn—what’s often called maize —not the nutritionally deficient, genetically modified corn seen in modern supermarkets.
17. Cajete, “Indigenous Foods, Indigenous Health: A Pueblo Perspective,” in Cajete, A People’s Ecology, 91.
18. Heidi Bruce, “Muckleshoot Foods and Culture: Pre-20th Century Stkamish, Skopamish, Smulkamish, and Allied Longhouses,” Fourth World Journal 16, no. 1 (Summer 2017). Landscape cultivation to increase food availability was also widely practiced throughout Indigenous California.
19. Melissa K. Nelson, “Re-Indigenizing Our Bodies and Minds Through Native Foods,” in Nelson, Original Instructions, 189.
20. LaDuke, Recovering the Sacred, 168.
21. In 1988, the Ojibwe filed a lawsuit against Busch Agricultural Resources for false and misleading advertising, because the company had marketed their product as “authentic” Minnesota lake rice, with an image of two Indians in a canoe harvesting wild rice, when in fact the rice was commercially grown in California. The lawsuit, settled out of court, was considered a small victory when state laws were changed to add the term “paddy rice” to “wild rice” on packaging.
22. Amanda Raster and Christina Gish Hill, “The Dispute over Wild Rice: An Investigation of Treaty Agreements and Ojibwe Food Sovereignty,” Agriculture and Human Values 34, no. 2 (May 2016): 267–81.
23. Biopiracy happens when corporations patent plants originating in Indigenous cultures for profit, without compensation or recognition of those people, an appropriation of Indigenous knowledge. One criticism is that when patents are privately held Indigenous communities are deprived of the right to commercially develop those resources. As this case points out, however, the commercial ownership of knowledge itself is considered anathema to many Indigenous peoples.
24. Ibid.
25. LaDuke, Recovering the Sacred.
26. For more on the history of the trouble and subsequent agreements, see the film A River Between Us. 27. Jamie Bissonnette Lewey, “For the Penobscot Nation, the Water in the River Is the Blood in Their
Veins,” Bangor Daily News, January 5, 2016. 28. Anderson, Tending the Wild.
29. The Colville reservation is composed of twelve bands who historically lived in separate territories and groups with distinct histories, customs, and governing systems. They have been forced to operate as one tribe since the reservation was formed in 1872.
30. Michelle Chino, Darlene R. Haff, and Carolee Dodge Francis, “Patterns of Commodity Food Use among American Indians,” Pimatisiwin: A Journal of Aboriginal and Indigenous Community Health 7, no. 2 (2009): 279–89.
31. “Frequently Asked Questions,” Indian Affairs, US Department of the Interior website, https://www.bia.gov/frequently-asked-questions, accessed October 8, 2018.
32. Numerous legal actions were enacted to outlaw the practice of American Indian religious traditions, such as the Indian Religious Crimes Code (1883), which imposed prison terms on those caught engaging in ceremonies; the BIA’s Rules of Indian Courts, which directed Indian agents to put an end to traditional religious practices and gatherings; and the Dawes Act, which institutionalized Christianity within the boarding school system to prevent the perpetuation of Native religions.
33. Because of the secretive nature of Native plant medicine knowledge, aside from early anthropological texts there is a dearth of modern literature on the use of traditional American Indian medicinal plants, especially about their contemporary use. However, with threats due to climate change and other environmental changes, there is a recognition of the need for relevant research relative to the protection of these important cultural resources. For more on the revitalization of Native plant medicines, see Clint Carroll’s study, Roots of Our Renewal: Ethnobotany and Cherokee Environmental Governance (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015).
34. Checkerboarding happened within reservation boundaries when original allottees sold or otherwise lost their allotments to private, non-Indian landowners. The result was a land mass that became a

“checkerboard” of trust and fee simple lands.
35. Besides causing the initial destruction of communities, dam construction is connected to some of the ongoing health problems in Indian country through the loss of traditional foods and habitats that support them. See Jerilyn Church, Chinyere O. Ekechi, Aila Hoss, and Anika Jade Larson, “Tribal Water Rights: Exploring Dam Construction in Indian Country,” Journal of Law, Medicine, and Ethics, Supplement S1, 43, no. 1 (Spring 2015): 60–63.
36. Ogallala Aquifer Initiative 2011 Report, United States Department of Agriculture, https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb1048827.pdf.
37. Cynthia Brougher, “Indian Reserved Water Rights Under the Winters Doctrine: An Overview,” June 8, 2011, http://nationalaglawcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/assets/crs/RL32198.pdf.
38. Robert Anderson, “Water Rights, Water Quality, and Regulatory Jurisdiction in Indian Country,” Stanford Environmental Law Journal (September 2015).
39. See, for example, McCool, Native Waters.
40. K. Cozzetto et al., “Climate Change Impacts on the Water Resources of American Indians and Alaska Natives in the U.S.,” Climatic Change 120 (2013): 569–84.
41. Anderson, “Water Rights, Water Quality, and Regulatory Jurisdiction in Indian Country.”
42. Ed Williams, “Small Tribe, Big River: Isleta Eyes Pollution in the Rio Grande,” Public Health New Mexico, February 19, 2015, http://publichealthnm.org/2015/02/18/small-tribe-big-river-isleta-eyes-pollution-in-the-rio-grande.
43. “EPA Says It Won’t Repay Claims for Spill That Caused Yellow Rivers,” CBS News Online, January 13, 2017, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/gold-king-mine-spill-colorado-rivers-epa-claims.
44. Noel Lyn Smith, “Group to Present Update on Mine Spill Study,” Farmington Daily Times, May 23, 2017, http://www.daily-times.com/story/news/local/navajo-nation/2017/05/23/group-present-update-mine-spill-study/102020678.
45. Cozzetto et al., “Climate Change Impacts on the Water Resources of American Indians and Alaska Natives in the U.S.”
46. Ibid., 575–76. 47. Ibid.
48. Food Sovereignty: Valerie Segrest at TedxRainier, YouTube video, https://www.youtube.com/watch? v=RGkWI7c74oo.
49. The Feeding Ourselves Report can be found at http://indigenousfoodandag.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/FeedingOuselves2015.pdf.
50. In 2016, I attended one of the conferences, held in Cherokee territory in Tulsa, Oklahoma, as a member of the Center for World Indigenous Studies research team, which was at the time partnered with the Muckleshoots in the most recent phase of the MFSP. Over two and a half days, conference presentations ranged from heirloom seed preservation in the Cherokee Nation to debates on organic food certification in the Choctaw Nation—which grows much of its own food for its casino restaurant business—and even a geothermal greenhouse project on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota.
51. Valerie Segrest, Rudolph C. Ryser, Heidi G. Bruce, Dina Gilio-Whitaker, and Leslie E. Korn, Muckleshoot Food Sovereignty Assessment: Conclusions of Nine-Month Study (October 2016–2017), June 22, 2017.
52. The concept of Indian survivance was captured by Ojibwe scholar Gerald Vizenor and describes a process of active survival whereby Native peoples adapt their cultures to modern circumstances.



C HAPTER FIVE: (NOT SO) STRANGE BEDFELLOWS
1. Quoted in Anderson, Tending the Wild, 156–57.
2. Michael Popejoy, “The Beginnings of American Naturalism in Our Own Backyard,” Emerson and the Environment series, April 1, 2014, Harvard University Sustainability webpage, https://green.harvard.edu/news/beginnings-american-naturalism-our-own-backyard.
3. The terms “preservation” and “conservation” are often used interchangeably, but there are distinctions. According to the National Park Service, “Conservation is generally associated with the protection of natural resources, while preservation is associated with the protection of buildings, objects, and landscapes. Put simply conservation seeks the proper use of nature, while preservation seeks protection of nature from use.” “Conservation vs. Preservation and the National Park Service,” lesson plan, National Park Service website, https://www.nps.gov/klgo/learn/education/classrooms/conservation-vs-preservation.htm, accessed October 8, 2018.
4. Spence, Dispossessing the Wilderness, 5.
5. See, for example, the online version of Selections from the “Indian Notebooks” (1847–1861) of Henry D. Thoreau, a collection of notes Thoreau kept, which appear to have been intended for an eventual book. Richard Fleck, ed., Thoreau Institute at Walden Woods, 2007, https://www.walden.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/IndianNotebooks-1.pdf.
6. The literature on Thoreau and Muir is vast and entire volumes could still be written. It would be especially useful to see Indigenous perspectives. A couple of notable examples are the works of Robert F. Sayre and Richard F. Fleck. Sayre is admittedly more realistic in his critique of Thoreau’s adherence to the “savagist” paradigm, although he believes Thoreau was able to overcome his savagism to some degree later in life. I see Fleck, on the other hand, as more an apologist for Thoreau’s savagism. See Sayre, Thoreau and the American Indians, and Fleck, Henry Thoreau and John Muir Among the Native Americans.
7. Henry David Thoreau, Journal 10, chap. 6, “January, 1858,” 251–52, Walden Woods Project Online, February 2016, https://www.walden.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Journal-10-Chapter-6.pdf.
8. See Fleck’s Selections from the “Indian Notebooks” for Thoreau’s references to Morton. Morton advanced the theory of craniology in early race studies, in which skull size was believed to determine intelligence and culture and to distinguish certain innate differences between people of different “races.” His work, along with that of other scientists of the time who set out to prove the inferiority of non-white people, laid the groundwork for the field of anthropology and is now referred to as “scientific racism.”
9. In his 1983 treatise Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New England, William Cronon addresses Thoreau’s lamenting of the woods of Walden as “maimed” and “imperfect,” raising the question, “What are we to make of the wholeness and perfection which he thought preceded it? It is tempting to believe that when the Europeans arrived in the New World they confronted Virgin Land, the Forest Primeval, a wilderness which has existed for eons uninfluenced by human hands. Nothing could be further from the truth. . . . Indians had lived on the continent for thousands of years, and had to a significant extent modified its environment to their purposes” (12).
10. For more on the history of national parks and tribal relations, see Robert H. Keller and Michael F. Turek, American Indians and National Parks (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1998); and Phillip Burnham, Indian Country, God’s Country: Native Americans and the National Parks (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2012).
11. Keller and Turek, American Indians and National Parks, 52. The authors also offer a rare critique of George Bird Grinnell, an early anthropologist and naturalist who was instrumental in the creation of Glacier National Park and later founder of the Audubon Society. Grinnell is known for his close relationship with the Blackfeet, but his extensive writing on Indian cultures reflects his belief in their inferiority, and his work ultimately contributed to the violation of Blackfeet treaty rights and their expulsion from the park. See note 10, page 56, for an analysis of Grinnell’s Indian views.

12. Galen Clark, who came to the valley for the first time in 1855, had extensive knowledge of Indian land cultivation in Yosemite Valley, which he described as necessary not only for food propagation but also to protect from enemy incursions. Galen Clark, letter to the Board of Commissioners of the Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Big Tree Grove, August 30, 1894, quoted in Anderson, Tending the Wild, 157.
13. Another early California pioneer, Lafayette Bunnell, understood the parklike landscape he observed as a product of human intervention. Quoted in Anderson, Tending the Wild, 158.
14. Anderson, Tending the Wild. Original text by Belgian gold miner Jean-Nicholas Perlot, in Gold Seeker: Adventures of a Belgian Argonaut During the Gold Rush Years, trans. H. H. Brentnor (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1985).
15. Anderson, Tending the Wild.
16. The Ahwaneechee Miwok of Yosemite had intermarried extensively with other Sierra Miwok, Mono Paiute, Yokuts, and other ex-mission Indians and are often referred to as the Yosemite Indians.
17. Spence asserts that the creation of Yellowstone rested on the idea of the landscape as a “national ‘Wonderland’and against the background of renewed military campaigns to curtail movements of several western tribes.” Dispossessing the Wilderness, 56.
18. Ibid., 157n30. 19. Ibid., 116.
20. Anderson notes that from a California Indian perspective, the term “management” doesn’t apply, as it is a Western concept. Rather, it’s a “caring for” of the plants and animals in a “deeply experiential relationship of reciprocity with them.” Tending the Wild, 153.
21. Muir was the son of a strict Scottish Calvinist, and although he rejected the Calvinism of his childhood, he maintained a strong Christian worldview and saw himself in a role we would today call white savior. In a 1978 essay by Richard Fleck, in which he makes the case for Muir’s evolution based on his journals and other written work, Muir actively proselytizes to the Natives and imagines himself as something of a cultural hero to them. Fleck even makes the dubious claim that “it wasn’t long until the Indians with Muir began to take delight in things they never before enjoyed like seeing glaciers and hearing the roar of icebergs breaking off into the bay.” See “John Muir’s Evolving Attitudes toward Native American Cultures,” American Indian Quarterly 4, no. 1 (February 1978): 19–31.
22. Merchant, “Shades of Darkness.”
23. Michael P. Cohen, “History: Origins and Early Outings,” The History of the Sierra Club: 1892–1970 (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1988), https://vault.sierraclub.org/history/origins.
24. Shepard Krech III, The Ecological Indian: Myth and History (New York: W. W. Norton, 2000).
25. See the film Reel Injun for an in-depth look at de Corti’s life and the degree to which he adopted an off-screen Indian persona.
26. Castaneda, often referred to as a father of the New Age movement, was an anthropology student at UCLA who passed his work off as serious scholarship, earning a doctorate based on it and megafame and wealth. He was later found to have lied about nearly everything, from the existence of Don Juan to where he was born, and he even had his doctorate rescinded. One commentator called the episode “the largest literary and academic fraud in history.” Wallace Sampson, “An Original: Richard de Mille, Carlos Castaneda, and Literary Quackery,” Science-Based Medicine website, June 25, 2009, https://sciencebasedmedicine.org/an-original-richard-de-mille-carlos-castaneda-literary-quackery.
27. Other examples of counterculture and New Age fakery include Jamake Highwater, Ruth Beebe Hill, Lynn Andrews, Mary Summer Rain, Hyemeyost Storm, and James Arthur Ray, just to name a few.
28. Smith, Hippies, Indians, and the Fight for Red Power, 8.
29. Paul C. Rosier, “‘Modern America Desperately Needs to Listen’: The Emerging Indian in an Age of Environmental Crisis,” Journal of American History (December 2013): 711–35.
30. LaDuke, All Our Relations. 31. Ibid.
32. Robert Miller notes, however, that the major environmental groups—particularly Greenpeace—did not oppose the hunt, probably because gray whales had rebounded to record high numbers. “Tribal Cultural

Self-Determination and the Makah Whaling Culture,” in Sovereignty Matters: Locations of Contestation and Possibility in Indigenous Struggles for Self-Determination, ed. Joanne Barker (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2005), 123–52.
33. Chris Clarke, “When Green Groups Fought Native Rights: The Timbisha Shoshone in Death Valley,” KCET Link, January 2, 2017, https://www.kcet.org/shows/tending-the-wild/when-green-groups-fought-native-rights-the-timbisha-shoshone-in-death-valley.
34. Brett Wilkinson, “Smaller Salamander Protection Zone Unveiled for Sonoma County,” Center for Biological Diversity, republished from the Press Democrat, August 30, 2011, https://www.pressdemocrat.com/news/2291244-181/smaller-salamander-protection-zone-unveiled.
35. Smith, Hippies, Indians, and the Fight for Red Power, 142.
36. According to the Wall Street Journal, in 2011 the top five Western oil producers posted record profits, exceeding $140 billion (“Oil Giants Profits Soar, but Investors Aren’t Sold,” Wall Street Journal, October 27, 2017, https://www.wsj.com/articles/profits-jump-at-exxon-chevron-bp-total-shell-1509109079). Even after the oil market crashed in 2014, Reuters reported that the production of shale oil (which relies on fracking technology) made the US the world’s top net exporter of oil—2.5 million barrels a day in 2016 (“Why Record U.S. Oil Exports Are Poised for Even More Growth,” Reuters, July 26, 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-oil-exports/why-record-u-s-oil-exports-are-poised-for-even-more-growth-idUSKBN1AC0ER).



C HAPTER SIX: HEARTS NOT ON THE GROUND
1. “Why the Founder of Standing Rock Sioux Camp Can’t Forget the Whitestone Massacre,” Yes Magazine, September 3, 2016, http://www.yesmagazine.org/people-power/why-the-founder-of-standing-rock-sioux-camp-cant-forget-the-whitestone-massacre-20160903.
2. See Sally Roesch Wagner, Sisters in Spirit: Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) Influence on Early American Feminists (Summertown, TN: Native Voices Book Publishing, 2001).
3. K. Tsianina Lomawaima, “The Mutuality of Citizenship and Sovereignty: The Society of American Indians and the Battle to Inherit America,” American Indian Quarterly 37, no. 2 (Summer 2013): 334.
4. See Wagner discussing her work in the video Sisters in Spirit: The Iroquois Influence on Early American Feminists, August 5, 2013, YouTube video, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3HoLpdHpQQQ.
5. Shari M. Huhndorf and Cheryl Suzack, “Indigenous Feminism: Theorizing the Issues,” in Indigenous Feminism: Politics, Activism, Culture, ed. Shari M. Huhndorf, Cheryl Suzack, Jeanne Perrault, and Jean Berman (Vancouver: UBC Press, 2010), 3.
6. Cristina Stanciu, “An Indian Woman of Many Hats: Laura Cornelius Kellogg’s Embattled Search for an Indigenous Voice,” American Indian Quarterly 6, no. 3 (Summer 2013): 87–115.
7. Cathleen Cahill, “Marie Louise Bottineau Baldwin: Indigenizing the Federal Indian Service,” American Indian Quarterly 6, no. 3 (Summer 2013): 63–86.
8. Bruce E. Johansen, “Women of All Red Nations (WARN),” in Johansen, Encyclopedia of the American Indian Movement (Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood, 2013), e-book, https://publisher.abc-clio.com/9781440803185/312.
9. M. A. Jaimes Guerrero, “‘Patriarchal Colonialism’and Indigenism: Implications for Native Feminist Spirituality and Native Womanism,” Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy 8, no. 2 (Spring 2003): 58– 69.
10. The most notorious example of Native men’s oppression of women is the story of the murder of Anna Mae Aquash in 1975. It’s a sordid tale of lies, cover-ups, and collusion to protect some of AIM’s most high-profile members (both men and women), spanning decades. It also involves undercover FBI informants planted to destabilize the movement under the COINTEL program. The case went unsolved until two male AIM members were finally convicted in 2004 and 2010, but according to an investigative piece in the New York Times, prosecutors were never convinced that they acted alone. See Eric Konigsberg, “Who Killed Anna Mae?,” New York Times Magazine, April 25, 2014, https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/27/magazine/who-killed-anna-mae.html.
11. Johansen, “Women of All Red Nations.” For an excellent accounting of the history of forced sterilization in Indian country, see Sally J. Torpy, “Native American Women and Coerced Sterilization: On the Trail of Tears in the 1970s,” American Indian Culture and Research Journal 24, no. 2 (2000).
12. Two studies conducted by the Association on American Indian Affairs, one in 1969 and one in 1974, led to the ICWA legislation.
13. Some of these very women also initiated American Indians’work in the international arena in the 1980s. Both WARN and the IWN sent delegations to the United Nations and other international conferences and forums, including the historic Women’s International Conference in Beijing in 1985, to advocate for Indigenous rights. Their work contributed to what eventually resulted in the creation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in 2007.
14. “Alliance Statement,” International Council of Thirteen Indigenous Grandmothers, October 13, 2004, http://www.grandmotherscouncil.org/alliance-statement.
15. The women who started the Idle No More movement are Nina Wilson, Sheelah McLean, Sylvia McAdam, and Jessica Gordon. All but McLean are First Nations women.
16. Nancy Tuana and Chris J. Cuomo, “Climate Change: Editors’Introduction,” Hypatia, Special Issue on Climate Change (Summer 2014).

17. Ibid.
18. See the National Institute of Justice Research Report, André B. Rosay, Violence Against American Indian and Alaska Native Women and Men: 2010 Findings from the National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey (Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, May 2016), https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/249736.pdf.
19. Background on the Inquiry, Government of Canada, date modified April 22, 2016, https://www.rcaanc-cirnac.gc.ca/eng/1449240606362/1534528865114.
20. Rosay, Violence Against American Indian and Alaska Native Women and Men.
21. Tribal Affairs, Office of Violence Against Women, https://www.justice.gov/ovw/tribal-affairs, accessed October 9, 2018.
22. On the topic of authentic connection to land, see, for example, Deloria, Playing Indian; Shari Huhndorf, Going Native: Indians in the American Cultural Imagination (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001); and Jean M. O’Brien, Firsting and Lasting: Writing Indians Out of Existence in New England (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010). These and other scholars argue in essence that the history of displacing Indigenous peoples through violent settlement exposes deeply unsettled feelings about belonging in a land without the ancient ancestral connections that Native people have.
23. Salter and Adams, “Toward a Critical Race Psychology.”
24. Lipsitz first wrote about possessive investment in whiteness in a widely read 1999 journal article that later turned into a book. See The Possessive Investment in Whiteness: How White People Benefit from Identity Politics (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2006).



C HAPTER SEVEN: SAC RED SITES AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTIC E
1. In Jacqueline Keeler, ed., Edge of Morning: Native Voices Speak for the Bears Ears (Salt Lake City: Torrey House Press, 2017).
2. Dave Archambault II, “Desecration of Sacred Sites by Oil Company,” Hill, September 6, 2016, http://thehill.com/blogs/pundits-blog/energy-environment/294680-standing-rock-sioux-chairman-on-desecration-of-sacred.
3. Chelsey Lugar, “DAPL Desecrated Sacred Sites, Took 10 Days to Report to State, as Human Rights Abuses Continue,” Indian Country Today, November 4, 2016, https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/history/sacred-places/dapl-desecrated-sacred-sites-took-10-days-to-tell-state-as-human-rights-abuses-continue.
4. Dave Singleton, program analyst at CNAHC, email message to author, August 24, 2011.
5. California Coastal Commission, W 8b Revised Staff Report and Recommendation on Consistency Certification, file date March 26, 2007, 190–91.
6. On February 6, 2008, the California Coastal Commission conducted a public hearing to hear testimony from all sectors of the community weighing in on the toll road, drawing some 3,500 people. Milford Wayne Donaldson, state historic preservation officer, when discussing the impacts of the proposed road, testified that “all we know is the impact from that freeway is sitting right on top of the site.” Reporter’s Transcript of Proceedings, Agenda Item No. 8b, Hearing on Consistency Certification No. 018–07 before the California Coastal Commission, February 8, 2008.
7. Surfing is a multibillion-dollar international industry. The World Surf League (then organized as the Association of Professional Surfers) holds the world’s most prestigious high-stakes surf contests in international locations such as Australia, Brazil, France, Portugal, South Africa, and Tahiti, and at the time of the 241 toll road controversy held four of its contests in the US. Until 2018, Trestles had been one of the stops on the WSL tour, when it was replaced by a high-tech wave pool newly built by former surfing world champion Kelly Slater. Ironically, it was located in California’s Central Valley agricultural community of Lemoore, 258 miles from the ocean.
8. The California Coastal Commission was established under the 1976 California Coastal Act. Widely perceived as one of the most powerful land use bodies in the United States, the law and the commission’s mandate is to protect the environment of the coastal zone and the public’s access to it.
9. Reporter’s Transcript of Proceedings, February 6, 2008. Quoted in a letter from the City Project/United Coalition to Protect Panhe to Thomas Street at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and Carlos Gutierrez, US secretary of commerce, May 28, 2008.
10. California Coastal Commission, W 8b Second Addendum to Commission Packet for Energy, Ocean Resources, and Federal Consistency Division (Update for the Staff Recommendation), 4.
11. Ibid.
12. A “traditional cultural property” is an official designation, as defined by National Register Bulletin 38, under the National Park Service, US Department of the Interior.
13. The City Project—an environmental justice law firm—did, however, raise the idea that the toll road was an issue of transportation justice, because building a private road through a public park would disproportionately affect low-income people also by limiting access to affordable recreation and their inability to afford the toll.
14. In 1979 the Acjachemen (Juaneño) filed an application with the Bureau of Indian Affairs for federal recognition. After a grueling thirty-two-year process, they were denied for a second time in March 2011 on grounds that they did not meet four out of the seven necessary standards set forth by the US government.
15. According to Eva Marie Garoutte’s research, “a 1978 congressional survey found no less than thirty-three separate definitions of Indians in use in different pieces of federal legislation.” Real Indians: Identity and the Survival of Native America (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003), 16.

16. George Tinker, “An American Indian Theological Response to Ecojustice,” in Weaver, Defending Mother Earth, 163.
17. Deloria, God Is Red; Grossman, Unlikely Alliances, 66.
18. Tinker, “An American Indian Theological Response to Ecojustice,” 163. 19. Ibid., 165.
20. Commissioner Schallenberger had worked for many years for the president pro-tem of the state senate and in that position had worked on bills to protect Native American sacred sites, thus he had a good base of knowledge of Native American worldviews that constitute sanctity.
21. Suzanne J. Crawford, Native American Religious Traditions (New York: Routledge, 2007).
22. David H. Getches, Charles F. Wilkinson, and Robert A. Williams Jr., Cases and Materials on Federal Indian Law, 5th ed. (St. Paul, MN: Thompson West, 2005), 747. It should be noted, however, that the dissenting opinion of Justice Brennan (who joined Justices Marshall and Blackmun) was uncompromising when he stated, “The land-use decision challenged here will restrain respondents from practicing their religion as surely and as completely as any of the governmental actions we have struck down in the past and the Court’s efforts simply to define away respondents injury as nonconstitutional are both unjustified and ultimately unpersuasive.” Ibid.
23. “Save the Peaks Coalition News Release: Supreme Court Affirms Tribes Have No Religious Rights,” Indigenous Action Media, June 9, 2009, http://www.indigenousaction.org/save-the-peaks-coalition-news-release-supreme-court-affirms-tribes-have-no-religious-rights.
24. Quoted in Grossman, Unlikely Alliances, 180–81.
25. See Dina Gilio-Whitaker, “Landslide Vote Quashes 400-Acre Development Project in Southern California,” Indian Country Media Network, October 5, 2016, https://indiancountrymedianetwork.com/history/sacred-places/landslide-vote-quashes-400-acre-development-project-in-southern-ca-saves-sacred-sites, accessed May 26, 2018.
26. Middleton, Trust in the Land, 3. 27. Ibid.



C HAPTER EIGHT: WAY S FORWARD FOR ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTIC E IN INDIAN C OUNTRY

1. Thomas Linzey and Mari Margil, keynote speech, Bioneers Conference, 2016, YouTube video, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QiXjzgRiAEw.
2. See “Save Trestles Campaign, San Onofre State Beach at Risk of Destruction Again,” Surfrider Foundation, 2015, video, https://yhoo.it/1FMQtoi.
3. Exec. Order, B-10–11, https://www.gov.ca.gov/2011/09/19/news17223.
4. As a journalist, I covered the Banning Ranch story for Indian Country Media Network and personally communicated with a Sierra Club spokesperson, Terry Welsh, president of the Banning Ranch Conservancy board of directors. He was not only very interested in the tribal cultural resources aspect of the land, but understood the significance of laws protecting Native American cultural sites to broader environmental interests.
5. See examples from Naomi Klein, who wrote about the “blockadia” phenomenon in This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Climate (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2014), and Clayton Thomas-Muller’s essay “The Rise of the Native Rights-Based Strategic Framework: Our Last Best Hope to Save Our Water, Air, and Earth,” in the volume The Winter We Danced, ed. Kino-nda-niimi Collective (Winnipeg: ARP Books, 2014).
6. Andrea Smith, Native Americans and the Christian Right: The Gendered Politics of Unlikely Alliances (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008), 256.
7. This is not to say that Democrats are always better than Republicans on Indian issues. Hillary Clinton’s stance on the Dakota Access Pipeline is a clear example of her abandonment of support for Indian country, as is the example of North Dakota senator Heidi Heitkamp during the Oceti Sakowin encampments. While Heitkamp has championed numerous pro-Indian bills and legislation, as an elected official heavily backed by industry money, she consistently supported the pipeline project and failed to act to stop the human rights violations committed by the militarized police and private security firms or address the egregious history of Indian land theft.
8. Nadja Popovich, Livia Albeck-Ripka, and Kendra Pierre-Louis, “67 Environmental Rules on the Way Out Under Trump,” New York Times, January 31, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/10/05/climate/trump-environment-rules-reversed.html.
9. In May 2018 the Trump administration announced a new federal health policy that would classify American Indians as a “racial group” subject to the same Medicaid work rules as all other people, a blatant undermining of tribal sovereignty that troubled even Oklahoma Republican senator Tom Cole. Justin Wingerter, “Oklahoma Tribes and Tom Cole Say ‘Troubling’Medicaid Policy Weakens Tribal Sovereignty by Labeling Them a Race,” Oklahoman, May 7, 2018, https://newsok.com/article/5593676/oklahoma-tribes-and-tosm-cole-say-troubling-medicaid-policy-weakens-tribal-sovereignty-by-labeling-them-a-race.
10. Middleton, Trust in the Land, 7–8.
11. “Tribal & Native Lands Program,” Trust for Public Lands website, https://www.tpl.org/tribal-native-lands-program#sm.001udhwvgl95dv010ed2k1jzwj9vb, accessed October 9, 2018.
12. “Projects,” Mountain Maidu Summit website, www.maidusummit.org, accessed October 9, 2018. 13. See Jay T. Johnson, Renee Pualani Louis, and Andrew Kliskey, “Weaving Indigenous and
Sustainability Sciences: Diversifying Our Methods (WIS2DOM) Workshop,” report from the National Science Foundation workshop, February 13–16, 2013.
14. Juliet Eilperin, “Uranium Firm Urged Trump Officials to Shrink Bears Ears National Monument,” Washington Post, December 8, 2017, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/uranium-firm-urged-trump-officials-to-shrink-bears-ears-national-monument/2017/12/08/2eea39b6-dc31–11e7-b1a8–6258–9434a581_story.html?utm_term=.a54feee5604c.
15. The Ho Chunks’technique of amending their constitution is far more complex than passing a statute,

as the Ponca did, and as of this writing is still incomplete. See the Ho Chunk tribal newspaper Hocak Worak 32, no. 1 (January 12, 2018), for language and analysis of the amendment, http://www.hocakworak.com/archives/Issue1.pdf.
16. Much controversy exists regarding whether fracking is the cause of earthquakes. The US Geological Survey has consistently denied the connection between earthquakes and fracking, but other studies, such as one conducted in Canada, confirm not just correlation but also causation between fracking and earthquakes. See Xuewei Bao and David W. Eaton, “Fault Activation by Hydraulic Fracturing in Western Canada,” Science, December 16, 2016, http://science.sciencemag.org/content/354/6318/140.
17. Ponca Tribe of Oklahoma, Resolution 01–01092018, a Resolution Recognizing the Immutable Ponca Tribal Rights of Nature.
18. The Center for World Indigenous Studies conducted an extensive study on how tribal governments protect or regulate plant- and animal-based medicines on reserved lands and found that very few integrated traditional protocols with tribal legal frameworks. See Rudolph Rÿser and Dina Gilio-Whitaker, “Regulating Access to Customary Fourth World Foods and Medicines: Culture, Health, and Governance,” Fourth World Journal 17, no. 1 (Summer 2018).
19. Mari Margil, attorney with Community Environmental Legal Defense Fund, personal communication with author, June 8, 2018.
20. The lawyer in the case, Jason Flores-Williams, was threatened by the judge with fines and possible disbarment for bringing a frivolous and illegal lawsuit. See Chris Walker, “Attorney to Withdraw Colorado River Lawsuit Under Threat of Sanctions,” Westworld, December 4, 2017, http://www.westword.com/news/colorado-river-lawsuit-to-be-withdrawn-due-to-potential-sanctions-9746311.
21. “Historic Vote on Community Rights State Constitutional Amendment in NH Legislature,” press release, Community Environmental Legal Defense Fund website, March 16, 2018, https://celdf.org/2018/03/press-release-historic-vote-on-community-rights-state-constitutional-amendment-in-nh-legislature.
22. “About,” Unsettling American: Decolonization in Theory and Practice website, https://unsettlingamerica.wordpress.com/about, accessed October 9, 2018.
23. See Laura Hurwitz, “Settler Colonialism and White Settler Responsibility in the Karuk, Konomihu, Shasta and New River Shasta Homelands: A White Unsettling Manifesto,” master’s thesis, Humboldt State University, 2017, https://digitalcommons.humboldt.edu/etd/106. See also Laura Hurwitz and Shawn D. Bourque, “Killing the Settler to Save the Human: The Untidy Work of Unsettling Klamath River Thus Far,” Fourth World Journal 17, no. 2 (Summer 2018).
24. Karla General, “Securing Rights to Sacred Places with the UN Declaration,” Indian Law Resource Center, n.d., http://indianlaw.org/content/securing-indigenous-rights-sacred-places-un-declaration, accessed October 9, 2018.
25. California Coastal Commission, Draft Tribal Consultation Policy, August 18, 2017. 26. General, “Securing Rights to Sacred Places with the UN Declaration.”
27. The UN General Assembly has been discussing implementation and monitoring protocols at least since the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples in 2014 but has made little progress.
28. General, “Securing Rights to Sacred Places with the UN Declaration.”
29. Rÿser and Gilio-Whitaker, “Regulating Access to Customary Fourth World Foods and Medicines.”





Selected Bibliography




Anderson, M. Kat. Tending the Wild: Native American Knowledge and the Management of California’s Natural Resources. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005.
Barber, Katrine. Death of Celilo Falls. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2005.
Berkes, Fikret. Sacred Ecology. 3rd ed. New York: Routledge, 2012.
Cajete, Gregory, ed. A People’s Ecology: Explorations in Sustainable Living. Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light, 1999.
Card, Claudia. “Genocide and Social Death.” Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy 18, no. 1 (Winter 2003): 63–79.
Carroll, Clint. Roots of Our Renewal: Ethnobotany and Cherokee Environmental Governance. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015.
Cheyfitz, Eric. The Disinformation Age: The Collapse of Liberal Democracy in the United States. London: Routledge, 2017.
Cronon, William. Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New England. New York: Hill and Wang, 2003.
Cutter, Susan L. “Race, Class, and Environmental Justice.” Progress in Human Geography 19, no. 1 (1995): 111–22.
Deloria, Philip J. Playing Indian. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998. Deloria, Vine, Jr. God Is Red: A Native View of Religion. 3rd ed. Golden, CO:
Fulcrum, 2003.
Denzin, Norman K., Yvonna S. Lincoln, and Linda Tuhiwai Smith, eds. Handbook of Critical and Indigenous Methodologies. Los Angeles: Sage Publications, 2008.
Dhillon, Jaskiron, and Nick Estes. “Standing Rock, #NoDAPL, and Mni Wiconi.” Cultural Anthropology (December 22, 2016). https://culanth.org/fieldsights/1010-standing-rock-nodapl-and-mni-wiconi.
Dunbar-Ortiz, Roxanne. An Indigenous Peoples’History of the United States. Boston: Beacon Press, 2014.
Estes, Nick. “Fighting for Our Lives: #NoDAPL in Historical Context.” Red Nation. September 18, 2016. https://therednation.org/2016/09/18/fighting-

for-our-lives-nodapl-in-context.
Fleck, Richard F. Henry Thoreau and John Muir Among the Native Americans. Hamden, CT: Shoestring Press, 1985.
Grinde, Donald A., and Bruce E. Johansen. Ecocide of Native America: Environmental Destruction of Indian Lands and Peoples. Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light Books, 1995.
Gross, Elizabeth, and Paul Stretesky. “Environmental Justice in the Courts.” In Failed Promises: Evaluating the Federal Government’s Response to Environmental Justice, edited by David Konisky. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015.
Grossman, Zoltan. Unlikely Alliances: Native Nations and White Communities Join to Defend Rural Lands. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2017.
Huhndorf, Shari M., and Cheryl Susack, eds. Indigenous Feminism: Politics, Activism, Culture. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2010.
Keller, Robert H., and Michael F. Turek. American Indians and National Parks. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1998.
Kosek, Jake. Understories: The Political Life of Trees. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006.
LaDuke, Winona. All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land. Chicago: Haymarket Books, 1999.
——. “Indigenous Environmental Perspectives: A North American Primer.”
In Native American Voices: A Reader, ed. Susan Lobo and Steve Talbot, 353–68. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001.
——. Recovering the Sacred: The Power of Naming and Claiming. Cambridge, MA: South End Press, 2005.
Leise, Christopher. “Ken Kesey’s One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: Damming the Columbia River and Traumatic Loss.” Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment 25, no. 1 (Winter 2018): 62–79.
Lindsay, Brendan C. Murder State: California’s Native American Genocide, 1846–1873. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2012.
Lord, Charles P., and William A. Shutkin. “Environmental Justice and the Use of History.” Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review 22, no. 1 (1994): 1–26.
McCool, Dan. Native Waters: Contemporary Indian Water Settlements and the Second Treaty Era. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2006.
McDonnell, Michael A., and Dirk A. Moses. “Raphael Lemkin as Historian of Genocide in the Americas.” Journal of Genocide Research 7, no. 4 (2005): 501–29.
Merchant, Carolyn. “Shades of Darkness: Race and Environmental History.”

Environmental History 8, no. 3 (2003): 380–94.
Middleton, Beth Rose. Trust in the Land: New Directions in Tribal Conservation. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2011.
Moore-Nall, Anita. “The Legacy of Uranium Development on or near Indian Reservations and Health Implications Rekindling Public Awareness.” Geosciences 5 (2015): 15–29.
Nelson, Melissa K., ed. Original Instructions: Indigenous Teachings for a Sustainable Future. Rochester, VT: Bear and Company, 2008.
Newcomb, Steve. Pagans in the Promised Land: Decoding the Doctrine of Discovery. Golden: Fulcrum, 2008.
Peña, Devon G. “Toward an Environmental Justice Act.” New Clear Vision. March 2, 2011. http://www.newclearvision.com/2011/03/02/toward-an-environmental-justice-act.
Pierini, Bruce. “How Did the Hetch Hetchy Project Impact Native Americans?” Snowy Range Reflections: Journal of Sierra Nevada History and Biography 6, no. 1 (2015). https://www.sierracollege.edu/ejournals/jsnhb/v6n1/pierini.html.
Pulido, Laura. Environmentalism and Economic Justice: Two Chicano Struggles in the Southwest. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1996.
Ranco, Darren J., Catherine O’Neill, Jamie Donatuto, and Barbara L. Harper. “Environmental Justice, American Indians and the Cultural Dilemma: Developing Environmental Management for Tribal Health and Well-Being.” Environmental Justice 4, no. 4 (2011): 221–30.
Rechtschaffen, Clifford, Eileen Gauna, and Catherine O’Neill. Environmental Justice: Law, Policy and Regulation. 2nd ed. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2009.
Reséndez, Andrés. The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian Enslavement in America. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016.
Salter, Phia, and Glen Adams. “Toward a Critical Race Psychology.” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 7, no. 11 (2013): 781–93.
Sayre, Robert F. Thoreau and the American Indians. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1977.
Schlosberg, David. “Reconceiving Environmental Justice: Global Movements and Political Theories.” Environmental Politics 13, no. 3 (Autumn 2004): 517–40.
Short, Damien. Redefining Genocide: Settler Colonialism, Ecocide, and Social Death. London: Zed Books, 2016.
Smith, Linda Tuhiwai. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples. London: Zed Books, 1999.

Smith, Sherry L. Hippies, Indians, and the Fight for Red Power. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Smith, Sherry L., and Brian Frehner, eds. Indians and Energy: Exploitation and Opportunity in the American Southwest. Santa Fe, NM: School for Advanced Research, 2010.
Spence, Mark David. Dispossessing the Wilderness: Indian Removal and the Making of the National Parks. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1999.
US Commission on Civil Rights. Environmental Justice: Examining the Environmental Protection Agency’s Compliance and Enforcement of Title VI and Executive Order 12898. Washington, DC: US Commission on Civil Rights, 2016. http://www.usccr.gov/pubs/Statutory_Enforcement_Report2016.pdf.
Vickery, Jamie, and Lori M. Hunter. “Native Americans: Where in Environmental Justice Research?” Society and Natural Resources 29, no. 1 (2016): 36–52.
Voyles, Traci Brynne. Wastelanding: Legacies of Uranium Mining in Navajo Country. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015.
Weaver, Jace, ed. Defending Mother Earth: Native American Perspectives on Environmental Justice. New York: Orbis Books, 1996.
Westra, Laura. Environmental Justice and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: International and Domestic Legal Perspectives. New York: Taylor and Francis, 2008.
White, Richard. The Organic Machine: The Remaking of the Columbia River. New York: Hill and Wang, 1995.
Whyte, Kyle Powys. “Indigenous Experience, Environmental Justice, and Settler Colonialism.” April 25, 2016, SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2770058.
——. “Indigenous Food Systems, Environmental Justice, and Settler Industrial States.” In Global Food, Global Justice: Essays on Eating under Globalization, ed. M. Rawlinson and C. Ward, 143–56. Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars, 2015.
Wildcat, Daniel. Red Alert: Saving the Planet with Indigenous Knowledge. Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 2009.
Wolfe, Patrick. “Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native.” Journal of Genocide Research (2006): 387–409.





Index




Please note that page numbers are not accurate for the e-book edition.

Abenaki, 37 Abourezk, James, 117
Acjachemen, 132–38, 140, 143, 149, 191n6, 192n14; Juaneño Band of Mission Indians, 132–38, 140, 143, 149, 191n6, 192n14
An Act for the Government and Protection of Indians (1850–65), 43 adoption, 117
agriculture, 17, 45, 54–55, 62, 77, 86. See also food and food systems Ahwaneechee Miwok, 61, 187n16
Aitteon, Joe, 95
Alaska: national parks in, 96; Native peoples of, 29, 74, 82, 85, 86, 100, 121; resource extraction in, 2, 55, 68, 105
Alberta tar sands, 84, 142, 180n37
Alcatraz Island occupation (1969–71), 10, 116 Alcoa Corporation, 68
Allard, LaDonna Brave Bull, 5, 111
American Indian Movement (AIM), 116, 118, 190n10 American Indian Religious Freedom Act (1978), 140–41, 161 Anderson, M. Kat, 97, 187n20
anencephaly, 80 Animas River, 85
Anishinaabeg. See Ojibwe anthropology, 59, 95, 186n8 Aotearoa (New Zealand), 154 Aquash, Anna Mae, 190n10 Arapaho, 47, 67
Archambault, Dave, Jr., 5, 10, 131, 172n23
Arizona: mining in, 66; sacred sites in, 141–42, 153; water control in, 62 arsenic poisoning, 75
Audubon Society, 101, 187n11

Bacon’s Rebellion (1674), 41
Bad River Band of Lake Superior Tribe, 87 Bakken Oil Fields, 2, 54, 70, 72
Baldwin, Marie Louise Bottineau, 115, 116 Baldy, Cutcha Risling, 176n59
Banks, Dennis, 116
Bears Ears Intertribal Coalition, 153
Bears Ears National Monument, 151, 152–54 benevolent supremacy, 33, 174n43
Big Mountain, 66 biological warfare, 53
biopiracy, 79, 183n21, 183n23 birth defects, 67, 80, 117, 118 Bismarck, North Dakota, 3, 131 Black Bear Ranch, 158
Black Elk Speaks (Neihardt), 104 Blackfeet, 97, 187n11
Black Hills, 67, 117, 142 Black Mesa, 66
black snake prophecy, 1
boarding school era (1887–1934), 49, 150 Boldt Decision (1974), 11
Bolivia, 154
Bonds, Anne, 25–26 Bonneville Dam, 61
Bonnin, Gertrude Simmons, 115–16 Bosque Redondo, Fort Sumner, 45–46 Brown, Jerry, 148
buffalo extermination, 58–59, 81, 93 Bundy, Ammon and Ryan, 7 Bunnell, Lafayette, 187n13 Burgum, Doug, 10
burial grounds. See sacred sites Burns Paiute Indian Reservation, 47
Busch Agricultural Resources, 183n21

Cahuilla, 152
California: assembly bills, 148, 159; dams and national parks in, 61, 62, 93, 96– 98, 100, 106, 187n12, 187n16; farmworkers resistance, 15, 17; Klamath, 62,

79–80, 102, 157–58, 180n23; Native extermination in, 43, 46, 50, 100, 147– 48, 160; Native forced relocation in, 47; Native peoples of, 48, 68, 187n12, 187n16; Newport Banning Ranch development, 143, 149, 193n4; resource extraction in, 55, 64; sacred site protection in, 13, 132–38, 140, 143, 148, 149, 159–60, 191n6; wild food and plant systems of, 80, 83, 183n18
California Coastal Commission, 134–35, 159–60, 191n6, 192n8 California Native American Heritage Commission, 132–33, 134, 136 California Natural Resources Agency, 148
Camp-Horinek, Mekasi (Casey), 7
Camp of the Sacred Stones, 3, 4, 83, 110, 111. See also #NoDAPL movement Camp Pendleton Marine Base, 132–35
Canada: resistance movements in, 10, 119–20; resource extraction in, 71, 84, 142, 180n37
cancer, 65, 67, 73, 80, 117. See also health issues Canyon de Chelly National Monument, 153
capitalism, 21–24, 62, 69, 149, 172n31. See also settler colonialism Carlton, James, 44
Carmen, Andrea, 118 Carroll, Clint, 54, 75, 82 Carson, Rachel, 91
casinos, 106–8, 150, 185n50 Castaneda, Carlos, 104, 188n26 Catlin, George, 92–93
Cayuga, 113
Center for Biological Diversity, 107
Center for World Indigenous Studies, 185n50, 195n18 Changes in the Land (Cronon), 186n9
Chavez, Cesar, 15, 17 Chavis, Ben, 16
checkerboarding, 184n34. See also reservation system Chemehuevi, 152
Cherokee: forced relocation of, 36, 44–45, 56; plant preservation by, 54, 185n50; Treaty of New Echota, 45, 175n25; US denial of sovereignty, 25
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 25 Cheyenne River, 67
Cheyenne River Reservation, 131 Cheyfitz, Eric, 172n21 Chickasaw, 35–36, 45, 56
child removal policies, 49, 117, 150

Chinook salmon, 80 Chippewa, 94. See also Ojibwe
Choctaw, 36, 45, 56, 119, 185n50
Christianity: discovery and inferiority trope of, 37, 56, 99–100; of early environmentalists, 96, 187n21; patriarchal values in, 112–14, 115–16. See also Manifest Destiny; settler colonialism
Citizens Equal Rights Alliance (CERA), 150 citizenship, 113–14
civil disobedient practices, 4
Civil Rights Act (1964), Title VI, 20, 21 Clark, Galen, 187n12
Clark, Wesley, Jr., 110
Clean Water Act (1972), 19, 85 Clearlake, California, 68
climate change: effects on water, 48, 85, 86–87, 177n35; global cooperation on, 108–9, 119; and Native economic development, 54, 70, 71, 149; Obama on Keystone XL and, 84; threats to medicinal plants, 184n33; Trump’s denial of, 151
climate justice movement, 108–10, 118–21. See also environmental movement climate refugees, 87
Clinton, Bill, 20
Clinton, Hillary, 8, 194n7
coal mining, 66–67, 71, 181n43, 181n45 coastal site conservation. See Panhe Coast Salish, 62
Code of Indian Offenses (1883), 140, 184n32 Colbert, Levi, 35–36
Cole, Tom, 194n9
colonization. See settler colonialism Colorado, 70, 85, 152, 155 Colorado River, 155
Colstrip mine, 67
Columbia River, 61–62, 67, 80, 179n22 Columbus, Christopher, 5, 24, 41–42
Colville Indian Reservation, 73, 80, 81, 183n29 Comanche, 47
Commission for Racial Justice (United Church of Christ), 16, 18 commodity food program, 81
Community Legal Environmental Defense Fund (CELDF), 156

Community Rights movement, 154–57
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA, 1980), 19, 68
Congressional Black Caucus, 19
conqueror model, 56–57. See also settler colonialism consent, as legal term, 32
conservation movement, 48. See also environmental movement conservation vs. preservation, as term, 186n3
controlled forest burning, 80
Convention on Biological Diversity (2009), 161 Coolidge Dam, 62
corn, 76–77, 183n16
Cortina Band of Wintun, 159
Council of Thirteen Indigenous Grandmothers, 119 counterculture hippie movement, 103–5, 158–59 Cowboy Indian Alliance, 84, 142
Creek, 36, 45, 56 crimes against peace, 68 criminology, 68–69 Cronon, William, 186n9 Crow, 93, 94
Crow Creek Reservation, 131 “Crying Indian” commercial, 103 cultural appropriation, 104–5 Cultural Conservancy, 144 cultural genocide. See genocide

Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL): initial proposal and claims of, 1, 3, 5–6, 72; legal dismissals on, 169n17; permitting process of, 168n12; Three Affiliated Tribes use of, 70; Trump’s support of, 9, 151. See also #NoDAPL movement; oil industry; Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation
Dakota people, 131 Dalles Dam, 61
dam construction and Native displacement, 48, 60–62, 79–80, 184n35. See also water control
Dawes Act (1887), 101, 131, 176n27 Death Valley National Park, 96, 106 decolonizing land project, 157–59 De Corti, Espera Oscar, 103, 188n25

Deloria, Vine, Jr., 139 Democracy Now!, 4 Denali National Park, 96 Deneven, William, 39 dental health studies, 76
depopulation: of buffalo, 58–59, 81, 93; deliberate intent of, as genocide, 50, 129; from disease, 76, 182n12; from forced relocation, 39–40, 44, 47; of game animals, 43, 98; from loss of cultural systems, 41, 49, 51; of salmon, 60, 62, 73–74, 79–80; vanishing Indian narrative, 59, 93, 178n9. See also genocide
deracination, 35–36, 174n3. See also forced relocation and displacement Desert Rock power plant, 71, 181n43, 181n45
diabetes, 61, 62, 73–75, 82, 89. See also health issues diet. See food and food systems
Diné (Navajo): in Bears Ears Intertribal Coalition, 153; as climate change activists, 109; Desert Rock power plant, 71, 181n43, 181n45; diabetes epidemic of, 74; forced relocation and mass depopulation of, 43–46; Fundamental Law of, 71, 181n44; mining’s effects on, 64–66, 118; water control and contamination affecting, 85
Diné Citizens Against Ruining Our Environment (CARE), 181n45 Diné Natural Resources Protection Act (2005), 66
Diné Policy Institute, 74 discovery doctrine, 55–56
disease, 39–40, 53, 65, 182n10, 182n12. See also health issues displacement. See forced relocation and displacement
Dispossessing the Wilderness: Indian Removal and the Making of the National Parks (Spence), 93
dog attacks, 4–5
domestic violence, 99, 121
domination paradigm, 149–50. See also settler colonialism Dunbar-Ortiz, Roxanne, 40–41
Duwamish, 77

Earth Day, 91, 92 Eastern Shoshone, 67
Echo-Hawk, Bunky, 53–54, 55, 72 ecocide, as legal concept, 68–69, 180n37 ecological Indian trope, 103, 104 economic surplus, 172n31
Ecuador, 154

1851 Treaty Camp, 6–7 Elwha Dam, 62, 180n23
Elwha River Ecosystem and Fisheries Restoration Act (1992), 180n23 Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 92
Endangered Species Act (1973), 19 energy colonization, 71
Energy Fuels Resources (USA), 153
Energy Transfer Partners (ETP), 1–6, 168n14. See also Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL)
entitlement, 104. See also white supremacy environment, as term, 21, 22 environmental deprivation, 39, 174n10
Environmental Equity Work Group (EEWG), 19–20
environmental impact assessments: of 241 toll road, 133, 135; of DAPL, 6, 9, 72, 168n12; in Death Valley, 106
environmental injustice, defined, 27
environmental justice (EJ): and capitalist state, 21–23; definition by EPA, 19; and genocide, 49–52; Indigenized, 12, 18–19, 26, 33, 136–38, 147–51; legal framework of, 19–21, 144–45; and settler colonialism, 25–26, 39; and sovereignty, 24–25; SRST on, 3; theory and historical overview of, 12–13, 15–19, 136
Environmentally Concerned Citizens of Lakeland Areas, 109
environmental movement: Indigenous peoples’movement relationship with, 12, 103–8; on national parks, 48, 92–95; organizations in, 101; origins of, 15, 91– 92; productive partnerships in, 105, 108–10, 134–35, 141–45, 152–54; white supremacy in, 99–102; wilderness myth in, 94, 95–99, 186n9. See also resistance movements, overview
environmental racism, as term, 21–22. See also racism
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency): EEWG, 19–20; failure of recognition by, 27–33; Gold King Mine managementc by, 85–86; IPWG, 28–29; Office of Environmental Justice, 20, 28; Office of International and Tribal Affairs, 28; origins of, 91; Plan EJ 2014, 31, 160; tribal policies of, 28, 31
Equal Rights Amendment, 114 equity vs. justice, 21
Estes, Nick, 5, 122 eugenics program, 117 Ewall, Mike, 21
Executive Order No. 12898 (Clinton), 20 Executive Order No. 13175 (Obama), 30, 160–61

Exxon Valdez oil spill, 91

farmworkers resistance, 15, 17 Fauntroy, Walter, 16
federal recognition of tribes, overview, 24, 48, 137–38
Federated Indians of the Graton Rancheria (FIGR), 106–8, 137, 150 Feeding Ourselves Report (2015), 88
feminism, 112–14. See also women First Nations Development Institute, 88 first-wave feminism, 112–14
fish. See salmon; steelhead; sucker fish Fish Wars (1964–74), 10, 105
Fleck, Richard, 186n6, 187n21 Flood Control Act (1944), 48, 61, 83
flooding, 48, 86. See also dam construction and Native displacement Fond du Lac Reservation, 87
food and food systems: commodity program, 81; loss of, 58–59, 61, 62, 73–75, 184n35; malnutrition and starvation, 40, 41, 43, 47, 48, 62, 81, 94, 176n27; sovereignty movement on, 87–90, 185n50; threats to, 78–82, 109. See also agriculture; hunting; plants
Food Sovereignty Initiative (Muscogee Creek), 89–90 food stamp program, 81
forced relocation and displacement: of California tribes, 43, 46, 47, 50, 100, 147–48, 160; checkboarding, 184n34; from dams, 48, 60–62, 61, 83, 179n22; deracination, 35–36, 174n3; Indian Removal Act on, 35, 45, 56; of Kickapoo, 47; The Long Walk, 43–45; and Marshall Trilogy, 25, 55–56, 193n22; Medicine Lodge Treaty on, 47; Osage Reign of Terror, 63–64, 66; of Paiute,
47; from Pick-Sloan Act, 47–48, 61, 83; Pomo Death March, 46; of Ponca, 47; reservation system, 81, 82, 93, 130–31, 176n27, 184n34; of Shawnee, 46–47; from termination policy, 48–49, 102; Trail of Tears, 35–36, 41, 44–45, 47; from transcontinental railroad, 57–59. See also genocide
forced sterilization, 117
Fort Berthold Indian Reservation, 70, 72 Fort Sumner, 43–46
fossil fuel extraction, 70–72, 119–20, 151 fracking, 69, 70, 110, 155, 189n36, 195n16 Fundamental Law (Diné), 71

gaming, 106–8, 150, 185n50

Ganges River, 154 Gauna, Eileen, 21 General, Karla, 160 General Motors, 68 genetic modification, 79 Genga, 143, 149
genocide: and ecocide, 69, 180n37; and environmental injustice, 50–52; ICC on, as crime against peace, 68–69; reservation system as, 176n27; US government’s lack of acknowledgment of, 49–50. See also forced relocation and displacement
Glacier National Park, 93, 96, 97, 187n11 Glines Canyon Dam, 62, 180n23
God Is Red (Deloria Jr.), 139 Gold King Mine, 85
gold mining, 109–10 Goldtooth, Dallas, 5 Goldwater Institute, 150 Goodman, Amy, 4 government rations, 81
Grand Canyon National Park, 96 Grand Coulee Dam, 73
Grann, David, 64 Grant, Ulysses S., 59
grazing, 5, 22, 63, 82, 86 Great Sioux Nation, 5, 48, 131 green criminology, 68–69 greenhouse gases, 120 Greenpeace, 106, 188n32 Grenier, John, 41
Grinnell, George Bird, 187n11 Grossman, Zoltán, 142
Guide on Consultation and Collaboration with Indian Tribal Governments and the Public Participation of Indigenous Groups and Tribal Citizens (NEJAC), 28

Haida, 105
Hanford Nuclear Reservation, 53, 67, 80 Haudenosaunee, 77, 113, 114
health issues: from dams and resource loss, 62, 73–74, 77, 79–80, 184n35; from

displacement, 48; from federal neglect, 73–74, 181n3; from loss of food systems, 45, 78–82; pre-contact vitality of Indigenous peoples, 76–77; reproductive health issues, 30, 67, 80, 117, 118; from resource extraction, 18, 65–68, 117. See also food and food systems
Heitkamp, Heidi, 194n7 Hetch Hetchy Reservoir, 61
historical narratives, 39–41, 175n11 Ho Chunk, 154–55, 194n15
Honor the Earth group, 109, 144
Hopi, 66, 109, 153. See also Pueblo people
House Concurrent Resolution 108 (1953), 48, 103 Huhndorf, Shari, 114
Humbug Valley restoration, 152
hunting: effects of treaties and territory reduction on, 81, 93, 98, 101, 131, 176n27; game depopulation, 43, 98; Native practices of, 40, 58, 86, 106, 188n32; restrictions on, 92, 94, 97. See also food and food systems
Hurwitz, Laura, 157–58 Hwéeldi, 43–46

Idle No More movement, 10, 119–20, 190n15 indentured servitude. See slavery
India, 154
Indian Child Welfare Act (1978), 117, 150 Indian Country Media Network, 122, 193n4 Indian Country Today, 68
Indian Health Service (IHS), 67, 74, 117, 181n3
Indian inferiority trope, 37, 95–96, 97, 99–100. See also racism Indian Religious Crimes Code (1883), 140, 184n32
Indian Removal Act (1830), 35, 45, 56 Indian Reorganization Act (1934), 102, 115
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (1975), 11, 69 Indian Service (Office of Indian Affairs), 115. See also US Bureau of Indian
Affairs
“Indian wild rice,” 79, 183n21
Indigenized EJ, 12, 18–19, 26, 33, 136–38, 147–51. See also environmental justice (EJ)
Indigenous Environmental Network, 71, 109, 144 Indigenous feminism, 114–21
Indigenous Food and Agriculture Initiative (University of Arkansas), 88

An Indigenous Peoples’History of the United States (Dunbar-Ortiz), 40 Indigenous Peoples Work Group (IPWG), 29–30. See also National
Environmental Justice Advisory Council (NEJAC)
Indigenous Women of the Americas—Defenders of Mother Earth Treaty (2015), 120
Indigenous Women’s Network (IWN), 118, 190n13 individualism, 104, 124
industrial revolution, 55–58. See also settler industrialism Interagency Working Group on Environmental Justice, 20 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 32 International Criminal Court. See Rome Statute (2002) International Indian Treaty Council (IITC), 118
Inwood, Joshua, 25–26
Iowa farming community, protest and lawsuit by, 2
Iron Eyes Cody, 103. See also “Crying Indian” commercial; De Corti, Espera Oscar
Iroquois, 77, 113 Isleta Pueblo, 85

Jackson, Andrew, 35, 45, 56 John Day Dam, 61
Johnson v. M’Intosh, 25, 55–56, 178n4
Juaneño Band of Mission Indians, 132–38, 140, 143, 149, 191n6, 192n14 justice vs. equity, 21

Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854), 58 Karuk, 62, 141, 157–58
Kasaan, 68
Kayenta Mine, 181n43
Keep America Beautiful, Inc., 103 Keller, Robert, 96–97
Kellogg, Laura Cornelius, 115 Kerr-McGee Company, 65, 66 Kesey, Ken, 105, 179–80n22 Kettle Falls, 73
Keystone XL Pipeline: Obama’s rejection of, 2, 110, 142; protests against, 1, 2, 84, 142; Trump’s support of, 9, 151. See also oil industry
Kickapoo, 47
Kidwell, Clara Sue, 45

Killers of the Flower Moon (Grann), 64 Kinzua Dam, 61
Kiowa, 47
Kiowa Apache, 47 Klallam, 62
Klamath River, 62, 79, 80, 157–58, 180n23 Klamath tribe, 79–80, 102
Klein, Naomi, 119 Konomihu, 157
Krech, Shepard, III, 103 Kyoto Protocol, 109, 119

Lac du Flambeau Ojibwe, 109 Lacey Act (1894), 94 LaDuke, Winona, 78–79, 119
Lake Oahe, 3, 5–6, 83, 111, 168n12 Lakeshore Ecology Phase, 76
Lake Superior Tribe, 87 Lakota, 1, 5, 67, 131, 142
Lakota People’s Law Project, 169n17
land dispossession. See forced relocation and displacement land trusts, 144, 151–52. See also trust responsibility Lane, Phil, 142–43
legal frameworks: of environmental justice, 19–21; of Native nationhood, 24–25, 37–38, 178n4; rights of nature (RON), 154–57; US Supreme Court on Indian law, 174n7
Lemkin, Raphaël, 51
Letters and Notes on the Manners, Customs, and Condition of the North American Indians (Catlin), 93
life expectancy rates, 18 Lincoln, Abraham, 98 Lindsay, Brendan, 43, 50
logging industry, 79–80, 82, 105 Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock, 176n30 The Long Walk, 43–46
Los Angeles, California, 43 Los Angeles Times, 115
low education levels, 182n10 Lower Brulé Reservation, 131

Luiseño, 132 Lummi, 90 lung cancer, 65
Lushootseed, 77, 78
Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Association (1988), 140–41

Madley, Benjamin, 50
Maidu Summit Consortium, 152 Maine, 80
The Maine Woods (Thoreau), 95–96 maize. See corn
Makah, 106
Malheur National Wildlife Refuge (formerly Malheur Indian Reservation), 7, 47, 176n31
malnutrition, 40, 81, 176n27. See also food and food systems; starvation Manhattan Project, 64
Manifest Destiny, 48, 56, 92, 178n5. See also settler colonialism; westward expansion; white supremacy
manoomin, 78–79, 87 Maricopa Pima, 62
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (1972), 19 Mariposa Indian War (1850–51), 98
Marshall, John, 55–56
Marshall Trilogy, 25, 37, 55–56, 193n22 Marx, Karl, 24
Mathias Colomb Cree Nation, 71 McCarran Amendment (1952), 84 McCaslin, Wanda, 26
McCloud, Janet, 117, 118 McKibben, Bill, 119
Meaningful Involvement and Fair Treatment by Tribal Environmental Regulatory Programs (NEJAC), 28
Means, Lorelei De Cora, 117 Means, Russell, 116
medicinal plants, traditional, 54, 73, 76, 82–83, 94, 141, 184n33, 195n18. See also food and food systems; plants; religious practices and traditions
Medicine Lodge Treaty (1867), 47, 176n30 Menominee, 102
Merchant, Carolyn, 100

mercury contamination, 68, 80 Mesa Verde National Park, 96
The Metaphysics of Modern Existence (Deloria Jr.), 139 Mexican farmworkers movement, 15, 17
Middleton, Beth Rose, 144, 151–52 Midnight uranium mine, 67, 68 Mill Creek, Nevada, 68
Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa, 94
mining, 17–18, 64–67, 109–10, 117, 170n3 Minneapolis violence, 116
Minnesota, 78–79
miscarriages, 67, 117. See also reproductive health issues Missouri River, 48, 61, 83, 111
#Mniwiconi, 3
Mni Wiconi, 4, 13, 170n30 Modoc, 47
Mohawk, 113 Mojave Desert, 152
The Monkey Wrench Gang (Abbey), 105 Mono Paiute, 187n16
Monsanto, 79 Montana, 109–10
Morton, Samuel George, 96 Moses, A. Dirk, 52 Mountain Maidu, 152 Mountain Ute, 181n45
Mount Rainier National Park, 96 Mourning Wars of the Haudenosaunee, 42 Movement Rights, 156
Muckleshoot, 77–78, 87
Muckleshoot Food Sovereignty Project (MFSP), 88, 89, 185n50 Muir, John, 92, 95, 99, 100–101, 187n21
Muscogee Creek tribe, 89

Nakota, 131 Nanaboozhoo, 79 Nape Hote Win, 111
National Community Rights Network, 156
National Congress of American Indians (NCAI), 116

National Council of American Indians, 115–16
National Environmental Coalition of Native Americans, 144
National Environmental Justice Advisory Council (NEJAC), 20, 28, 30. See also Indigenous Peoples Work Group (IPWG)
National Environmental Policy Act, 21
National Environmental Protection Act (1989), 91 National Historic Preservation Act (1966), 131 National Lawyers Guild, 8
national parks movement, 48, 92–95. See also specific national park names nationhood, Native, 24–25, 37–38. See also sovereignty
Native American Church, 116
Native American Land Conservancy (NALC), 152 Native Hawaiians, 17, 49, 177n37
natural gas industry, 70–72
Natural Resource Management (Echo-Hawk), 53, 55 Nature (Emerson), 92
Nature Conservancy, 105 Navajo. See Diné (Navajo) Navajo National Monument, 153 Navajo Nation Code, 71, 181n44 Nelson, Melissa, 70, 78
Nevada, 68
New Age movement, 103–5, 188n26 Newcomb, Steve, 56
New Hampshire, 156
New Mexico, 22, 43–46, 65, 85
Newport Banning Ranch, 143, 149, 193n4. See also Genga New York, 68
New York Times, 151
New Zealand (Aotearoa), 154 Nez Perce, 61, 93
Neihardt, John, 104
noble savage trope, 56, 95, 96, 103
#NoDAPL movement, 3–8, 110, 111, 121–27, 143, 167n5. See also Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL); Standing Rock Sioux Tribe (SRST)
Nome Cult, 46 North Dakota, 54, 70
North Dakota Public Service Commission (PSC), 3, 131 North Dakota State Historic Preservation Office, 168n13

Northern Arapaho, 67 Northern Cheyenne, 67
Northwest Indian Women’s Circle, 118 NowThis News, 8
Nuclear Waste Policy Act (1982), 19
nuclear weapons industry and waste, 53, 64–65, 67, 80. See also uranium mining Numpa, Phil Wambli, 170n30

Obama, Barack: on Bears Ears National Monument, 153; on DAPL, 2; Exec. Order No. 13175, 30, 160–61; on Keystone XL permit, 2, 110, 142; on Snowbowl Ski Resort, 141; on Standing Rock protest, 8; on UNDRIP, 32–33, 173n42
obesity, 30, 81–82. See also health issues Occupy movement, 10
Oceti Sakowin (Great Sioux Nation), 5, 48, 131
Oceti Sakowin, as concept. See water is life, as concept
Oceti Sakowin Camp, 4, 83, 117, 121–22. See also #NoDAPL movement Office of Environmental Justice (formerly Office of Environmental Equity), 20,
28
Office of Indian Affairs, 115. See also US Bureau of Indian Affairs Office of International and Tribal Affairs, 28
Ogallala Aquifer, 84, 142
Oglala Sioux Civil Rights Organization (OSCRO), 118
oil industry, 63–66, 70, 110, 119, 151, 189n36. See also specific projects oil spills, 91, 170n30
Ojibwe, 78–79, 109, 183n21 Old Woman Mountains, 152
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest (Kesey), 105, 179n22 Oneida, 89, 113, 115
O’Neill, Catherine, 21 Onondaga, 113
original instructions, 70–72 Osage Reign of Terror, 63–64, 66 O’Shaughnessy Dam, 61 O’Sullivan, John, 178n5
The Other Slavery (Reséndez), 42

Paiute, 47, 68
Panhe, 13, 132–38, 140, 148, 191n6

papal bulls, 56, 178n6 Paris Accords, 109
patents on Native plants, 79, 183n23 patriarchy, 112–14, 116–17 Payómkawichum, 132
Peabody Coal battle, 66 Penobscot people, 80, 95–96 Penobscot River, 80
People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit, 18–19 personal edification, 104
pesticide use and farmworkers, 15, 17 peyote, 116
Pick-Sloan Act (1944), 47–48, 61, 83
Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin Program, 5 Pima, 62
Pine Ridge Reservation, 67, 117, 131, 185n50 Pipeline101.com, 1–2
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), 2 pipeline infrastructure, 1–2
Pipestem Law, 88
Plains peoples, 47, 58–59 Plan EJ 2014 (EPA), 31, 160 Plant, Pennie Opal, 119–20
plants, 54, 73, 76–77, 80, 82–83, 106, 184n33, 195n18. See also food and food systems; religious practices and traditions
pneumonia, 182n12
police violence, 4–5, 6–8, 116, 182n10
Policy for the Administration of Environmental Programs on Indian Reservations (EPA, 1984), 28
Policy on Environmental Justice for Working with Federally Recognized Tribes and Indigenous Peoples (EPA, 2014), 31
Polis, Joe, 95 Pomo, 46, 68
Ponca, 47, 155, 194n15, 195n17 potlatch ceremonies, 78
poverty: prevalence of chronic, 48, 71, 81, 89, 107, 182n10; response to, 61, 63, 69, 70, 102, 114. See also malnutrition; starvation
preservation movement. See environmental movement preservation vs. conservation, as term, 186n3

primitive accumulation, 24
Principles of Environmental Justice (Commission for Racial Justice), 18–19 pristine myth, 39
protestor vs. water protector, as term, 4
protests: Dakota Access Pipeline (2016), 3–8, 110, 111, 121–27, 143, 167n5; Iowa farming community (2015), 2; Keystone XL Pipeline (2015), 1, 2, 84, 142; by Mexican farmworkers, 15, 17; Trans-Alaska Pipeline (1968), 2
Public Law 103–150 (1993), 177n37 Public Law 111–118 (2010), 177n37 Public Law 280 (1953), 48
Pueblo people, 64–65, 76–77, 183n16. See also Hopi Pulido, Laura, 17
Puyallup, 77

Quapaw, 47

racism: craniology theory and scientific, 186n8; environmental racism, as term, 21–22; Indian inferiority trop, 37, 95–96, 97, 99–100; in settler colonial framework, 25–26, 106–8; as term, 22
Radiation Exposure Compensation Act (RECA), 66 radioactive pollution, 64–65
railroad expansion, 57–59 Ramos, Carolina, 122 ranching, 5, 22, 63, 82, 86 rape, 46
rationing, food, 81 Rechtschaffen, Clifford, 21
reciprocal relationship with land, 54–55, 82, 138–40 Recommendations for Fostering Environmental Justice for Tribes and
Indigenous Peoples (IPWG), 29–30 redband trout, 68
Red Power movement, 102, 103, 116–17 Red Warrior Camp, 4
religious practices and traditions: legal restrictions on, 184n32; of Native American Church, 116; perseverance of, 53–54; protection of, 140–41, 145, 161. See also plants; sacred sites
removal. See forced relocation and displacement Reséndez, Andrés, 42, 44
reservation system, 81, 82, 93, 130–31, 176n27, 184n34. See also forced

relocation and displacement; trust responsibility resistance movements, overview, 10–13
resource use vs. relationship with land, 54–55, 82, 138–40 rice, 78–79, 183n21
Ridge, John, 175n25
rights of nature (RON) approach, 154–55 Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, 108–9
Rio Puerco River contamination, 65, 118 Rio Tinto Copper Mine, 68
rivers. See dam construction and Native displacement; specific river names River That Makes the Sacred Stones. See Missouri River
Robertson, Lindsay, 178n4
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 88 Rome Declaration (2009), 161
Rome Statute (2002), 51, 68 Rosebud Reservation, 131 Rosier, Paul, 105
rugged individualism, 104, 124

sacred, as concept, 138–40
sacred sites: access to, 137; Bears Ears, 151, 152–54; Black Hills, 143–44; DAPL within, 131–32, 168n13; ETP’s destruction of, 4; Genga, 143, 149; Old Woman Mountains, 152; overview of protection of, 129–30; Panhe, 13, 132– 38, 140, 191n6; San Francisco Peaks, Ariz., 141–42; Sogorea Te, 159; “traditional cultural property,” as official designation, 129, 135, 136, 192n12. See also religious practices and traditions
Sacred Stone Camp, 3, 4, 83, 110, 111. See also #NoDAPL movement Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), 19
Saint Regis Mohawk Reservation, 68
salmon: extinction of, 60, 62; fishing practices and relationship with, 62, 73–74, 77, 79–80, 86, 152
Salt Chuck Mine, 68 salvage ethnography, 59
San Francisco Peaks, 141–42 San Juan River, 85
San Mateo Archeological District, 132–33 San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, 132 San Onofre State Beach, 132–35
Santee Reservation, 131

savage trope, 56, 59, 95, 97, 186n6 Save San Onofre Coalition, 135 Save the Peaks campaign, 142
SB 18 (California), 159 Schallenberger, Mary, 134–35, 192n20 Schlosberg, David, 23
school lunch program, 81
Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, 106 second-wave feminism, 114 segregation, 114
Segrest, Valerie, 87–88
self-determination, as concept, 88–89, 115. See also sovereignty Seminole, 45, 56
Seneca, 61, 113
settler colonialism: decolonizing land project against, 157–59; and environmental justice, 25–26, 39, 107–8; as genocide, 50; historical narrative in, 39–41; loss of food systems from, 75–76; Manifest Destiny, 48, 56, 92, 178n5; overview of, 5; and slavery, 24, 41–44; US government’s lack of acknowledgment of, 32–33; westward expansion, 55–62; Whyte on, 38. See also genocide; white supremacy
“Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native” (Wolfe), 50 settler industrialism, 75–76
Seven Councils Fire, 5, 10 Seventh Generation Fund, 144 Shasta tribe, 62, 157 Shawnee, 46–47
Sherman, William Tecumseh, 58–59 Sherwood uranium mine, 67
Short, Damien, 69 Shoshone, 67, 68, 93, 106 Shundahai Network, 109
Sierra Club, 99, 101, 105–6, 134, 193n4 Sierra Miwok, 187n16
Silent Spring (Carson), 91 Sinixt, 73
Sisseton Wahpeton Reservation, 131 skirt-wearing issue, 123–24, 125 slavery, 24, 41–44, 46, 55, 121 smallpox, 53

Smith, Linda Tuhiwai, 26 Smith, Sherry L., 105 Snowbowl Ski Resort, 141–42 social Darwinism, 96
social death, 52
Society of American Indians, 113–14, 114–16 Sogorea Te (Glen Cove), 159
South Dakota, 67 Southern Cheyenne, 47 Southern Ute, 70
sovereignty, 24–25, 87–90, 185n50. See also federal recognition of tribes, overview; self-determination, as concept; trust responsibility
Spence, Mark David, 93, 94, 187n17 Spokane Indian Reservation, 53, 67 Spotted Eagle, Faith, 125
squash, 77
Standing Rock Sioux Indian Reservation: effects of Pick-Sloan Act on, 48, 61, 83; formation of, 131; and Lake Oahe, 3, 5–6, 83, 111, 168n12; resistance camps on, 3, 4, 6–7, 83, 110, 111. See also #NoDAPL movement
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe (SRST): DAPL proposition to, 1, 3, 5–6, 72; on human rights abuses, 172n23; pipeline resolution of 2012, 3; request for EIS by, 6, 168n12; on sacred site near DAPL, 168n13
Stand Up California, 150 #Standwithstandingrock, 3
starvation, 41, 43, 47, 48, 62, 81, 94, 176n27. See also food and food systems; malnutrition
State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), 135 State v. Elliot, 37
steelhead, 62
Steinberg, Theodore, 60 sterilization programs, forced, 117 Stop the Casino 101 Coalition, 107 Story, Joseph, 56
structural genocide, as term, 50 sucker fish, 79, 80
suicide, 49, 74, 182n10
Sulfur Bank Mercury Mine, 68 Summer Heat campaign (2013), 119 Superfund sites, 68

Suquamish, 89
surf break conservation, 13, 133–35 surfing industry, 191n7
Surfrider Foundation, 134, 148 surplus value, 172n31
survivance concept, 90, 185n52. See also depopulation; sovereignty Susquehanna-Western uranium mine, 67
Sustainable Nations Development Project, 144 Suzack, Cheryl, 114
Sweetgrass Hills Protective Association, 109–10 Syngenta, 79
systems of responsibility, 27, 173n37

Teck Resources, 80 temporality, 139
termination policy, 48–49, 102 Te Urewera National Park, 154 Thomas, Clarence, 174n7 Thomas-Muller, Clayton, 71
Thoreau, Henry David, 92, 95, 100, 186n6 thrifty gene hypothesis, 81
Thunderhawk, Madonna, 117 tiger salamander, 107–8
timber industry, 79–80, 82, 105 Timbisha Shoshone, 106
Timbisha Shoshone Homeland Act (2000), 106 Tinker, George, 139
Tlingit, 100, 105 Tolowa, 141
Tongva, 132, 143, 149
Toxic Substances Control Act (1976), 19
Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States (1987 study), 16, 17 toxic waste sites, 15–16, 17, 170n3
“traditional cultural property,” as official designation, 129, 135, 136, 192n12 trafficking, sex, 121
Trail of Broken Treaties, 10, 116 Trail of Tears, 35–36, 41, 44–45, 47 Trans-Alaska Pipeline System, 2 transcendentalism, 92–93, 96

transcontinental railroad, 57–59
Transportation Corridor Agencies (TCA), 133–35 transportation justice, 192n13
treaty-making process, 57–58, 131, 178n11 Treaty of Fort Bridger (1868), 93
Treaty of Fort Laramie (1851, 1868), 3, 6, 93, 131 Treaty of New Echota (1835), 45, 175n25
Treaty of Point Elliott (1855), 87 treaty rights, overview, 130–31
Trestles surf break, 13, 133–35, 140, 191n7
Tribal Consultation Policy (California), 148, 159–60 Truman, Harry S., 102
Trump, Donald: on Bears Ears National Monument, 153–54; classification of American Indians as a “racial group” by, 194n9; reputation of, 8, 10, 11; on resource extraction, 8, 9, 67, 151
Trust for Public Lands, 152
trust responsibility, 27, 37–38, 69–70, 130–31, 173n37. See also land trusts; reservation system; sovereignty
Truth and Reconciliation Commission (Canada), 120 Tsosie, Rebecca, 71
tuberculosis, 73, 182n12 Turek, Michael, 97
Turtle Mountain Ojibway, 115 Tuscarora, 113

Umatilla, 61, 179n22
uncontrolled toxic waste sites, defined, 170n3. See also toxic waste sites United Church of Christ, 16
United Coalition to Protect Panhe (UCPP), 134–35
United Nations: Conference on Environment and Development, 108–9; Conference on Human Environment, 109; Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), 23, 30, 32–33, 159–61, 173n42, 190n13, 196n27; Environmental Program, 120; on genocide, 51, 52; on #NoDAPL protest, 1, 172n23
universal truth, 104
Unsettling Klamath River (UKR), 157–58 Unsettling Minnesota, 158
unsettling movement, 157–59
uranium mining, 17–18, 64–65, 67, 117, 170n3

US Army Corps of Engineers (ACE), 3, 9, 23
US Bureau of Indian Affairs: 1972 building takeover of, 10, 116; on DAPL, 9; on Klamath tribal status, 79; on resource management, 54, 150; Rules of Indian Courts, 184n32. See also Indian Service (Office of Indian Affairs)
US Congress, 59, 176n30 US Constitution, 21
US Department of Transportation. See Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA)
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 81 US Geological Survey, 195n16
Ute Indian Tribe, 153 Ute Mountain Utes, 153

Valandra, Edward, 170n30 vanadium mining, 65
vanishing Indian narrative, 59, 93, 178n9 violence, police, 4–5, 6–8, 74, 116, 182n10
violence against women, 46, 74, 99, 121, 182n10, 190n10 virgin wilderness myth, 39, 40, 175n11
Vizenor, Gerald, 185n52 Voyles, Tracy, 64

Wagner, Sally Roesch, 113
Wakangapi Wakpa. See Missouri River Walla Walla tribe, 179n22
Wall Street Journal, 189n36 Ward v. Race Horse, 94 Warm Springs tribe, 61 Warren, Kelsey, 1, 8–9
Warren County protest (1982), 15, 16 Washington Post, 153
Washington state: agriculture in, 77; tribal food systems in, 89; water control and contamination in, 61–62, 67, 68, 80, 179n22, 180n23
wastelanding, 64
water control: and contamination, 65, 67–68, 75, 84–86; dams and Native displacement, 48, 60–62, 79–80, 184n35
water is life, as concept, 4, 13, 83, 170n30 #Waterislife, 3
Watson, Paul, 106

West Harlem protest (1968), 15
westward expansion, 55–62. See also Manifest Destiny whale hunting, 106, 188n32
Whanganui River, 154
Wheeler Howard Act (1934), 101
White Earth Land Recovery Project, 105–6 White Earth Reservation, 105
white settler colonialism. See settler colonialism Whitestone Massacre (1863), 111
white supremacy, 99–102, 124, 191n24. See also environmental movement; settler colonialism
Whyte, Kyle Powys, 27, 38–39, 44, 46, 75–76 Wilansky, Sophia, 7–8
Wildcat, Daniel, 177n35 wilderness myth, 94, 95–99, 186n9 wild rice, 78–79, 183n21
Wilmer, Franke, 26 Wilson, Dick, 118
Wind River Indian Reservation, 67 Winnebago, 100
Winnemum Wintu, 62 Winter’s Doctrine (1908), 84
Wisconsin, 87, 89, 102, 154–55 W. K. Kellogg Foundation, 88 Wolfe, Patrick, 50
women: forced sterilization programs for, 117; Native traditions on, 112–14; skirt-wearing issue of, 123–24, 125; violence against, 46, 74, 99, 120–21, 182n10, 190n10
Women of All Red Nations (WARN), 117–18, 190n13
women’s leadership: global movement and organizations of, 10, 117–20, 190n13; history of, 111–12; in Native activist movements, 110, 114–21
Worcester v. Georgia, 25
Wounded Knee siege (1973), 7, 10–11, 105, 116

Yakama, 61, 179n22
Yakama Indian Reservation, 47, 53, 67, 80 Yakama Treaty (1855), 62
Yamuna River, 154 Yankton Reservation, 131

Yellowstone National Park, 93–94, 187n17 Yellowtail, Bethany, 123–24
Yezidi genocide, 121
Yocha Dehe Band of Wintun, 159 Yokut, 187n16
Yosemite National Park, 61, 93, 97–98, 100 Yosemite Valley, 97, 187n12, 187n16 Young, Phyllis, 117
Yucca Mountain, 144 Yurok, 62, 141, 157

Zinke, Ryan, 153–54 Zitkála-Šá, 115–16 Zuni, 153





Beacon Press
Boston, Massachusetts www.beacon.org

Beacon Press books are published under the auspices of the Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations.

© 2019 by Dina Gilio-Whitaker All rights reserved

eISBN: 978-0-8070-7379-7

Text design by Wilsted & Taylor Publishing Services

The names of some individuals in this book have been changed to protect their privacy.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Control Number: 2018057540
