












































OceanofPDF.com







CONTENTS






CHAPTER 1 CHAPTER 2 CHAPTER 3 CHAPTER 4 CHAPTER 5 CHAPTER 6 CHAPTER 7 CHAPTER 8 CHAPTER 9 CHAPTER 10 CHAPTER 11
OceanofPDF.com







CHAPTER 1






It was very stuffy and hot where I crouched, and the straw tickled my legs. There was hardly any light, either. But I could see the bird on her nest of straw. She was about five feet away from me, on the far side of the chicken house, and she had no idea I was there. If I moved I would spoil everything. So I stayed quite still. So did the chicken.

Presently, very slowly, she raised herself from the straw. She was facing away from me and bending forward. I saw a round white object gradually protruding from the feathers between her legs. It got bigger. Suddenly she gave a little wiggle and—plop!—it landed on the straw. I had actually watched the laying of an egg.

With loud, pleased clucks, the chicken shook her feathers, moved the egg with her beak, then proudly strutted her way out of the henhouse.

I tumbled out, stiff but excited, and ran all the way to the house. My mother was just about to call the police. She had been searching for me for hours. She had no idea that I had been crouched all that time in the henhouse.

This was my first serious observation of animal behavior. I was five years old. How lucky it was that I had an understanding mother! Instead of being angry because I had given her a scare, she wanted to know all about the wonderful thing I had just seen.

Even though I was so young at the time, I can still remember a lot about that experience. I remember being puzzled about eggs. Where on a chicken was there an opening big enough for an egg to come out? I don’t know if I asked anyone. If I did, no one told me. I decided to find out for myself. I remember thinking as I watched a hen going into one of the henhouses,

“Ah, now I’ll follow her and see what happens.” And I remember how she rushed out, squawking in alarm, when I squeezed in after her. Obviously that was no good. I would have to get in first and wait until a hen decided to come in and lay her egg. That is why I was so long inside the henhouse. You have to be patient if you want to learn about animals.

When I grew up I became an ethologist—a long word that simply means a scientist who studies animal behavior. Most people, when they think of an animal, think of a creature with hair, such as a dog or cat, a rabbit or a mouse, a horse or a cow. In fact, the word animal includes all living creatures except for plants. Jellyfish and insects, frogs and lizards, fish and birds are all animals just as cats and dogs are. But cats and dogs and horses are mammals, a special kind of animal. Humans are mammals, too.

You probably know all that. Children today know a lot more about these sorts of things than most adults did when I was your age. I remember having a huge argument with one of my aunts when I tried to make her believe that a whale was a mammal, not a fish. She wouldn’t believe me and I cried. I was so frustrated.

The first person to be known as an ethologist was an Austrian, Konrad Lorenz. He is often called the Father of Ethology. He has always loved animals of all kinds. In addition to the dogs he keeps as pets, he has lived with all kinds of wild animals in his home near Vienna. Most of these animals have been perfectly free to come and go as they please.

Konrad Lorenz is best known for his work with greylag geese. He began raising and studying them in 1935. He still sometimes observes them even now, though he is over eighty years old.

Konrad Lorenz found that adult male and female geese are very faithful to each other. They fall in love, marry, and stay together until one of them dies. Then the one who is left does not marry again. If its mother is still alive, it goes back to her.

Konrad Lorenz has been “mother” to many geese—those he raised from the time they left their eggs. When they became adult, these geese left him and

flew off with wild geese. But if they lost their mates, they came back to Lorenz.

He found that baby geese, when they hatch from their eggs, learn to follow the first moving object they see. Usually this is the mother goose. But when Lorenz raised geese, they followed him, instead! Then he discovered that if he hatched mallard duck eggs, the ducklings refused to follow him. But if they were hatched by a domestic duck, they followed her at once. What did the domestic duck do that he, Lorenz, didn’t? She quacked. And her quacking sounded just like the quacking of a mallard duck. “Ah!” thought Lorenz, “that is the secret.”

But scientists must always make tests. So, when the next lot of little ducklings hatched, Lorenz bent over them, quacked, and gradually moved away. They followed him! But it was very exhausting for him, taking his baby ducklings for a walk. If he stood up, towering high above them, or if he stopped quacking for more than a moment, they stopped following and began to cry loudly.

One day when Lorenz was walking the ducklings, something made him look up. Peering over the tall wall around the meadow were some of the village people. They were staring in horror at the professor who, as far as they could see, was quacking away to himself while creeping along the ground in a most peculiar way. The ducklings were completely hidden in the long grass! No wonder the local people began to think the professor was crazy!















Konrad Lorenz with his ducks. UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos.



Ethologists are interested in how animals live their lives and why they behave the way they do. They are always asking questions. Why does a dog go round and round in a circle before it lies on its bed? How does a male moth find his female even if she is miles away? And so on.

Some ethologists go on and on asking questions about one particular kind of animal. Karl von Frisch, a German, was fascinated by honey bees. How did a worker bee, returning to her hive after collecting honey, tell the other worker bees where to go? They could find her honey patch even if she, herself, didn’t return. He found out that the returning bee performs a wonderful “waggle dance” that tells the others exactly where to go. She gives signals with her legs, her wings, and her tail. Then Frisch wanted to know whether she could see the beautiful colors of the flowers. How good was her sense of smell? The more answers he found, the more questions he asked.

Other ethologists are interested in a particular kind of behavior, such as the migration of birds. Or the different ways that juicy, nice-tasting insects mimic poisonous ones so they will not be eaten. Or the food-burying behavior of rats and mice. All ethologists ask questions. How? Why? What for?

Ethologists do their studying in different ways. Lorenz, as I said, took the animals he wanted to observe home with him. He had a very long-suffering wife!

Others, like Niko Tinbergen, another very famous early ethologist, do experiments out in the place where the animals live. Tinbergen is best known for his work with different kinds of sea gulls. He used to go out to the cliffs and rocky ledges where they breed. He spent a lot of time just watching them and writing down all the different things they did. But he also experimented. He learned some most extraordinary things. Some gulls, for example, become really excited if they see a giant egg. If Tinbergen placed such a monster near the nest of a herring gull or an oyster catcher, she would leave her own egg and desperately (and hopelessly) try to clamber onto the monstrous fake!

Then there are other ethologists who also go to the home of the animals they wish to study but do not do experiments. They just watch, wait for things to happen, and record what they hear and see. That is what I do. I began living among and studying the chimpanzees in Tanzania (it was Tanganyika when I began) in 1960. I am still studying them today, with the help of a Tanzanian field staff.

It took me a long time before I could get close enough to the chimps to make good observations. At first they were very shy. It took even longer before I understood their language of calls and gestures and the way they live in their society. But it was worth it. Because, apart from the human animal, the chimpanzee is the most fascinating animal of all. At least, that is what I think.

How on earth, you may wonder, did I get started? I will tell you.







CHAPTER 2






I was born in London, on April 3, 1934, but soon my parents moved to a house just outside the city. We lived there with Nanny, whom I adored, and a bull terrier called Peggy.

My father was an engineer with a job in London. His hobby was motor-racing. He drove a super, very expensive car, an Aston Martin. He sometimes took me for a ride in the car, but I don’t remember much about that.

When I was five years old and my younger sister, Judy, was one, we all went to live in France. My parents wanted us to grow up speaking fluent French. But we had no time to learn—after only a few months, Hitler began the series of invasions that led to World War II. It was no longer safe for us to stay in France. Our house outside London had been sold, so we went to stay for a while in the lovely old manor house where my father had grown up.















The author at age 2.
















The author with her mother, father, and sister Judy.



The manor house was way out in the country, with a big farm next door. On the grounds were the ruins of a castle where the wicked king, Henry VIII, had shut up one of his wives. I remember those ruins: they seemed scary, all gray, crumbling stone and spider webs. There were bats in one room that still had part of its roof.

The manor house itself was very old, too. If you walked from one end to the other, you had to go down one or two steps here, up a little slope there, and so on, because different parts had been built at different times. It was made of gray stone, which was cool in summer and very cold in winter. There was no central heating. There were few places in England with central heating in those days. Inside the manor house there was always a faint smell

from the oil lamps that were lit every evening—for there was no electricity. Even now, fifty years later, the smell of oil lamps always makes me think of the manor house.

I called my father’s mother Danny Nutt. She loved geese, and there were always six or more grazing on the grass near the house. And there was a very big enclosure for the hens, with five henhouses in it, like the one in which I hid. I used to help feed the hens and collect the eggs. Finding them was rather like an Easter egg hunt, because many of the hens preferred to lay under bushes, rather than inside the henhouses.

There were cows in the fields nearby. In those days they were all milked by hand, and I loved to watch the dairymaid squirt the white milk into her pail while the cow placidly chewed its cud. There were some heavy farm horses grazing in the meadows and often a racehorse mare out to grass with her foal. Racehorses were the business of my father’s brother, my uncle Rex. He had a small racing stable and managed a little racecourse about four miles from the manor house. Once, when I was two years old, I was allowed to ride on one of the racehorses. His name was Painstaker. Uncle Rex showed me how to make him move to the left or right by gently pulling one of the reins, and I managed to steer him, all by myself, in and out of the line of trees that ran along the main street of the little village. I can just remember that I was very proud.

As soon as England declared war on Germany, my father joined the army to help fight Hitler. Soon after that Nanny got married and went off to her own house with her husband. Then Mum, Judy, and I went to live with my other grandmother, Danny, in The Birches. The Birches is a lovely red brick house, with a big garden (that you would call a backyard) surrounded by a tall hedge that shuts out the world. It is in Bournemouth, on the southern coast of England, just a few minutes walk from the sea of the English Channel. That is where I spent the rest of my childhood and my adolescence.















The Birches.



We shared The Birches with my mother’s two sisters, Olwen (known as Olly) and Audrey. My uncle, a senior consultant surgeon in a huge London hospital, came home most weekends. During the war, all families with private houses that could were asked to take in people who temporarily found themselves without homes. And so we took in two single women for a while.

When America joined England in the fight against Hitler and the Nazis, many Yankee soldiers (as we called them) came over to England on their way to the fighting front in France, Holland, and Belgium. Some of them were stationed near us. Many of their tanks and trucks were parked along our quiet little road. The soldiers used to give us candy and other treats. We ourselves had very little food in England. Everything was rationed. We were allowed one egg apiece and two ounces of candy, and very little milk. The grown-ups usually gave us children most of their rations of candy, milk, and eggs. We needed coupons for everything, not just food. There were clothing coupons, gasoline coupons, and liquor coupons. And often, even if you had coupons, you couldn’t get the things because they weren’t available. Everything went to the soldiers, pilots, and sailors who were defending our island.

Some bombs fell on Bournemouth, though not many. We had an air-raid shelter installed in our house. It was a low, steel-roofed cage where the

whole family would creep and wait, huddled together, from the time when we heard the air-raid warning until the welcome sound of the “All Clear.”

However, for the most part we children were not much affected by the war. At the beginning we were too young to understand what was going on; by the end we had become used to news of battles, defeats, and victories.

During those war years I went to three different schools—a kindergarten and the equivalents of your junior and senior high school. I never really liked any of them. I didn’t mind the work—some of it I liked very much. But I hated having to leave home every morning, and I hated having to spend time indoors when I wanted to be outside. I longed for each day to end so that I could go home to my family. I longed for the weekends when I could go horseback riding. Most of all I longed for the holidays. Then, for days on end, I was free from school bells and school regimentation. On school days I hated to get up. Often Mum had to call me several times. On weekends and holidays it was different. Then I was always up early, at least when the weather was good. I would go out onto the cliffs, with their pine trees and gorse bushes, or down to the beach.

I spent a lot of time in the garden. It was big and rather wild. There was one beech tree I loved so much that Danny gave it to me for my tenth birthday. My very own tree! I could climb high in its branches when I was happy. I’d sit and watch the birds and listen to their songs. Sometimes I took my homework up there. And I climbed it when I was sad, too, so I could be sad by myself. When I was sad I read a book. Mum taught me to do that. She said it would help me to forget my troubles, at least for a while. And afterward they might not seem so bad. I still do that today.

In the winter I loved to curl up in front of the fire and read. Our house was always filled with books, many of them from my mother’s childhood. We couldn’t afford many new books, but we belonged to the local library. One day for my weekend library book Mum brought me The Story of Doctor Doolittle, by Hugh Lofting. I read it all the way through. Then I read it through again. I had never before loved a book so much. I read it a third time before it had to go back—I finished it under the bedclothes with a flashlight after Mum had turned off the light. That was in November. And I shall never forget that Danny gave me the book for my very own that

Christmas. I was seven years old. I think that was when I first decided I must go to Africa someday.



















The author, Nanny and Judy.



I read as many books as I could find about all sorts of animals, not only about those in Africa. I also loved stories of wolves, bears, and wolverines in North America and Canada, jaguars anacondas and sloths in South America, orangutans, Indian elephants, and tapirs in Asia, and so on. I loved The Jungle Book, by Rudyard Kipling, with its tales of Mowgli, and especially loved the books about Tarzan, by Edgar Rice Burroughs. But I never liked any of the Tarzan movies—my own imagined picture of Tarzan was more wonderful than any actor could possibly be.

Those animals seemed wonderful to me, but I knew that there was no way I could go and see them—not then. There was not even a zoo anywhere near us. And anyway, I wanted to watch wild animals, not animals in cages. So, as well as reading about those faraway animals, I also watched the wild creatures near my home—squirrels and birds and all kinds of insects. I started a nature club with four members—my sister and me and the Cary children, who came to stay almost every holiday. Sally was my age, Sue was Judy’s age. I was the leader of the club—the Alligator Club—and chose to be Red Admiral. Sally was Puffin, Sue was Ladybird, and Judy was Trout.

In a hidden place in the garden, surrounded by bushes, we had our “camp,” where we could light a little fire and boil water in a tin can, balanced on

rocks. In an old trunk we kept four mugs, small supplies of tea and cocoa, and a spoon. Sometimes we had “feasts” there, with bits and pieces of food saved from meals. As it was wartime, we usually had nothing more than a few crusts of bread and an occasional biscuit. But it was fun—especially when we crept out into the garden at midnight, which we did partly because it was spooky and partly because it was strictly not allowed!

We went on lots of nature walks and wrote down what we saw—as least, I did. There were always books at home where I could look up the names of the different insects or birds we found.

Each of us owned two “racing” snails with numbers painted on their shells. We kept them in an old wooden box with no bottom and a piece of glass on the top. This meant that we could move their home to a new place in the garden each time they had finished eating the leaves growing inside. We also fed them lettuce leaves and other treats. We would line the snails up in a row and lay bets as to which would reach the end of a six-foot racetrack first. We used blades of grass to keep them in a straight line, but the blades had to be soft, and we could touch only the side of the snail’s horn, not the sensitive end where the eye is located.

One summer we made a museum in the glass conservatory. We had a collection of pressed flowers and many shells, not only the local kinds from the Bournemouth beach but exotic ones collected by my adventurous great-grandfather during his travels to Australia and such places. Everything was very carefully labeled. Uncle Eric let us have a human skeleton leftover from his medical school days. That was our most prized exhibit.

Sally and I made Judy and Sue—we called them The Little Ones—go out into the street and ask passersby to come and see the museum. Afterward we asked them to make a contribution to a society for the protection of old horses—they were rescued from the butcher and put out to graze at Cherry Tree Farm.

When the Carys went back home at the end of the holidays, I used to put together an Alligator Club magazine. It was filled with nature notes, drawings of insect anatomy, and other such things. The other members were

supposed to contribute, and make comments and suggestions—but they hardly ever did.

Every Saturday during term time, and at least twice a week over the holidays, I went to a riding school in the country. We couldn’t afford to pay for riding lessons every week, but that didn’t matter. I just loved to be there, to be near the horses and ponies, to learn how to look after them. The only part I didn’t much enjoy was the endless cleaning of the tack—the saddles and bridles. Every single day they had to be washed, then rubbed with saddle soap. Miss Bush, who owned the riding stable, was really strict about cleaning the tack, and we had to do it even after the longest days.

I was happiest when I was invited, during the holidays, to stay with Poosh, Miss Bush’s assistant. We would get up before it was light and go down to the warm kitchen where Poosh’s mother, a comfortable Scotswoman, was already beginning work on breakfast. We drank hot tea and munched digestive biscuits. Then we went out into the first light of dawn to catch the ponies from the fields where they grazed during the night. We rode them, bareback with just a halter, to the riding stable. Often I had as many as five ponies, one on each side of me and two behind, on a long rope. Then I would groom them, give each of them a pile of hay, and get the tack ready for the first ride.

Eventually I was trusted to take clients out for rides. I got lots of free riding that way. And when I was fourteen I used to ride Poosh’s horse, Quince, in horse shows. On those days I had the thrill of getting up even earlier, grooming Quince until she shone, plaiting her mane and tail, oiling her hooves, then traveling with her in the horse trailer. I don’t think we ever won anything, but we sometimes came third or fourth in the jumping. And it was always exciting.

Once I went fox hunting. I’d never thought about what that really meant before. I’d just imagined the excitement of jumping great hedges, the challenge of trying to keep up with the best riders, and the thrilling sound of the hunting horn. I hadn’t thought about the fox.

I kept up only too well. So I saw the fox dug up out of his den, where he had at last found safety (he thought), and I watched the huntsman throw the

exhausted creature to the hounds to be torn up. Then I felt sick, and the excitement of the hunt was gone. I never went hunting again.

Most of all, when I think of my childhood, I think of Rusty. There will never again be a dog like Rusty in my life. He wasn’t even our dog—he lived in a hotel around the corner. I met him at a time when I used to take out a most beautiful collie called Budleigh for a lady who owned a sweetshop. I knew that she couldn’t give him as much exercise as he needed, so I used to run down to the beach with him almost every day. Rusty began to tag along.

I used to try to teach “Buds” a few tricks—such as sitting up and begging for a tidbit, or sitting with a biscuit on his nose until I said “Okay.” Then he could lower his nose and eat the biscuit as it fell to the ground. I never tried to teach Rusty anything. Then, one day when I was trying to teach Buds to shake hands, Rusty suddenly held out his paw. Of course, I made a big fuss over him—I had never thought him very intelligent before. But after that I began to teach him. In only three lessons he learned the biscuit-on-the-nose trick—but instead of lowering his nose when I said “Okay,” he gave a little upward jerk of his head so that the reward was tossed into the air. He caught and ate it as it fell.



















Rusty.



Rusty learned everything I tried to teach him. He would lie down and “die” on command and wait, even if I went out of sight for more than ten minutes. I discovered he could climb a tall workman’s ladder—at first I found him following me as I climbed, but later he would go up without me if I asked him to. He would jump anything—even through a hoop. I never punished him if he did something wrong, but I made a great fuss over him if he did it right. And that was enough encouragement for him—I hardly ever rewarded him with food. In fact, I almost never gave him any food, ever. He still slept at the hotel. But as soon as he was let out in the morning—about six-thirty —he came and barked at our front door. He trotted back for his evening meal, then returned to us until it was bedtime. We asked the owners if they minded. They didn’t care at all.

There was one way in which Rusty was different from most dogs. He loved to be dressed up. Most dogs hate to be dressed up, and it is very unkind of you to try to force it on them. But when I put clothes on Rusty, he went all floppy, like a rag doll. Sometimes I put him in pajamas and wheeled him around the streets in our old pram. But it was very important not to laugh at him. He hated that and would walk off at once, trailing clothes behind him.

Rusty taught me so much about animal behavior, lessons I have remembered all my life. He taught me that dogs can think things out—that

they can reason. If, for example, I threw a ball from an upstairs window, he would watch where it landed, then bark for the door to be opened, rush downstairs, bark for an outside door to be opened, then go and find the ball. He could plan, too. When it was very hot he sometimes took himself off along the street to the sea, had a swim, then trotted back, wet and cool.



















Rusty loved being dressed up.



Rusty was the only dog I have ever known who seemed to have a sense of justice. If he did something he knew was wrong (that is, something I had taught him was wrong), then he apologized the way dogs do, by rolling over on his back and grinning. But if I was cross about something that he thought was okay, then he sulked.

For example, I had taught him to “shut the door”: He would jump up and bang it shut. One day he did this with very wet, muddy paws, and without my having asked him (he wanted attention). “Oh Rusty—bad dog!” I said. He stared at me, then went and sat facing a wall, his nose a couple of inches away, and stayed that way even when I said “walkies!” Not until I knelt down and apologized did he move from his place and, gradually, become friendly again. He behaved like this on four quite separate occasions.

Another reason why I hated the end of the holidays was that I had to leave Rusty every morning when I went off to school.

At school I always did fairly well, especially in the subjects I found interesting, such as English, History, Scripture, and, of course, Biology. Math and languages I found more difficult, so I had to work harder at them. I usually came second or third in the end of term overall results. One very brainy girl (my high school was for girls only) always came first. My best

friend, Marie-Claude Mange, known as Clo, was either second, just above me, or third, just below me. For my last two years I took a strange mixture of subjects—Biology, English, and History. As they were the ones I had always liked best, those last years were my happiest at school.

I got good marks during my final exams when I was eighteen. And then, quite suddenly, my school days were over. What would I do next? I only wanted to watch and write about animals. How could I get started? How could I make a living doing that?







CHAPTER 3






The first thing I did when I left school was to go and spend four months with a family in Germany. After the war my mother felt that I ought to visit the country that had been our enemy. She thought it was important that I should realize that though Hitler and the Nazis were evil, there were also ordinary Germans who did not like Hitler.

But I didn’t enjoy that visit much. The part of Germany I was in was bleak, flat, and dreary. I remember best going with the younger daughter, Helga, to visit the neighboring farms, eating thick, dark bread in farmhouse kitchens, and learning to wear clogs. And I remember early morning walks through flat, frosty fields where I saw hares bound away over the white, hard ground.

I was supposed to learn German. But the family was so keen to learn good English that they hardly ever spoke German to me. Because, as I’ve told you, I was bad at languages, I only picked up a smattering.

One thing I have never forgotten. I went on a visit to the city of Cologne. Like so many other German cities, it had been heavily bombed by Allied forces during the war. As you looked out across the flattened, battered city, you could see the spire of Cologne Cathedral. It rose, quite undamaged, from the rubble of the surrounding buildings. To me it seemed like a message from God, telling us that however bad things may seem, in the end, goodness will win. All my childhood I had been to church. Not every Sunday, but many Sundays. Seeing the spire of Cologne Cathedral that day meant more to me than all the sermons I had ever listened to.

When I got back from Germany I went to a secretarial school in London. Mum said that secretaries could get jobs anywhere in the world. And so I learned how to type and do shorthand and simple bookkeeping.

I loved being in London visiting art galleries and going to concerts. I never learned to play a musical instrument, but I loved to listen to classical music. Of course, as I still had little money, I walked everywhere and sat in the very cheapest seats.

I got to know a lot of people. Young men sometimes took me out to dinner or to a theater. I had never had time for boys before; I had been far too busy with horses and walking in the country and Rusty. But now I had left school and was out in the big world.

When I had my secretary’s diploma, I went home for a while and got a job at Olly’s clinic. Olly was a physiotherapist to the children in the whole of the Bournemouth region, and she ran a clinic. Several times a week different doctors came in to examine their patients. I was there to type their letters.

Olly’s patients had all kinds of problems. There were tiny babies with club feet, children who had paralyzed limbs from polio, adolescents dying from muscular dystrophy. Some of the children couldn’t walk and would have to spend the rest of their lives in wheelchairs. Some could move about, but only by wearing clumsy leg-irons or crutches. There were spastic children, who would never be able to look after themselves. There was a little boy who was an “athetoid.” This is caused by damage to the brain stem during birth. The poor victims cannot properly control their muscles. Their arms and legs jerk violently. So do their faces when they try to speak. Usually it is very difficult to understand what they are trying to say.

Olly told me a wonderful story. In the old days, people thought that athetoids were crazy. Often they were put in mental institutions. Well, there was a little athetoid girl whose parents were rich. They didn’t want her shut into one of those places for the insane, so they paid for her to stay in the children’s ward of a big hospital. No one spent much time with her. One day a famous doctor was in the ward. He told a rather adult joke. None of the children laughed—they didn’t understand it. But suddenly the doctor

saw the eyes of the “crazy” girl—they were sparkling with fun. He knew that she had understood. He was amazed. He took her home with him and gave her special lessons. She was so intelligent that she not only learned to talk but soon passed all her school exams. Now we know that athetoids are almost always unusually bright.

I learned so much at that clinic. Ever since then, when things have gone wrong in my life, I remember how lucky I am to be healthy. I thank God for that, and I feel more determined to solve my problems or get over my sadness, or whatever. And I feel a special closeness with people who are crippled or disabled in any way.

After working at the clinic for six months, I got a job in Oxford. I had thought of going to the famous university there, but Mum could not afford to send me unless I won a major scholarship. For a major scholarship I needed a language. And, as you know, I didn’t have one. Well, I thought, a job there is the next best thing. The job itself was very boring—I worked in the filing department of the administrative building of the university. But I lived in a “bed sit” in a house with some Oxford graduate students—and so I got to know many other students. I had lots of fun—it was almost like being a student myself, without the work!

What I liked best, though, was the river. I used to take out a canoe and paddle silently along, early in the morning or late in the evening. I saw water birds, moorhens, kingfishers, and swans. The swans were a bit scary, especially when they had a nest or babies, because then they are sometimes aggressive. I knew one man who once had his leg broken when an angry swan, thinking he was after one of her babies, attacked him.

I also learned to punt, which is much harder than canoeing. You push along a flat-bottomed boat with a long pole, hoisting it, hand over hand, out of the water, then pushing it down hard and driving the boat forward. There are two problems. One is trying to keep the punt straight. The other is pushing the pole too hard into a patch of mud at the bottom of the river. Often you see a beginner either leaving his pole behind, or clinging on so desperately that he is pulled from the punt and splashes into the water. I very often got a ducking when I was learning!


















The author and her father, Mortimer Goodall. She is wearing her dress for the May ball.



I went to a couple of the famous May balls at Oxford. My first ball gown was white net, with pale gray swan feathers scattered over it, each one kept in place with a sequin. It was very expensive originally, but had been worn by a model in a fashion show, so I got it very cheap indeed. I felt like a princess when I wore that gown.

I remember one other dress—a wonderful crimson red lace. I am sure my mother did without cinemas and all sorts of other things in order to buy it for me. It had to be a good dress, for Uncle Michael and Auntie Joan were going to present me to Queen Elizabeth in Buckingham Palace. First I had to learn a full state curtsy. I had lessons from a funny old lady. She told me to practice and practice, always balancing something on my head. So I was quite proficient by the time I curtsied to the queen and Prince Philip. It was a magnificent occasion.

After a year at Oxford, I went back to London and an absolutely fascinating job. I worked at a film studio that made documentary films. They specialized in medical films but also made some about motor racing, and others that were just advertisements. My actual job was to choose the music for the film. I also learned how to edit, how to make sound tracks, how to mix, and all sorts of other things about filmmaking.

I lived in my father’s flat. By then my parents had divorced, but they were still good friends. And it was nice that I got to know my father a bit better during that year when I was in London.

What about my dream of Africa? Had I forgotten it? Absolutely not. I spent hours wandering about in the Natural History Museum. I continued to read books about animals, especially African animals. And, even while I loved my job, I knew that it was just filling in time. Always I was waiting for my lucky break.

When that lucky break finally came, I was ready. It happened one Wednesday morning. I received a letter from my school friend, Clo. I’d almost forgotten about her; we’d lost touch over the previous few years. And now, out of the blue, she invited me to go and visit her in Kenya, where her parents had just bought a farm. Kenya, Africa! You bet I would go!

First I had to earn the money. Wonderful though my film studio job was, I was paid a very small salary. I gave my notice and went back home. There I got a job as a waitress. I worked in a big, old-fashioned hotel just around the corner from The Birches.

Perhaps you think it’s easy to be a waitress—or a waiter? I did. I quickly learned how wrong I was. There were so many skills I had to master in order to become a good waitress. I learned to deftly lift a slice of meat or a helping of vegetables with serving spoon and fork neatly manipulated in one hand while holding the dish with the other. I got especially skillful at carrying several plates at the same time, without a tray. My record was thirteen plates with little servings of fish on each!

Each weekend I put my wages and my tips under the carpet in the drawing room. One evening, when I had been working for four months, the family gathered around, we drew the curtains (so no one could look in), and counted my earnings. How exciting—I now had enough money, along with the small amount I had saved while in London, for a round-trip fare to Africa!







CHAPTER 4






My first journey to Africa was by sea on a passenger liner, the Kenya Castle. I was twenty-three years old. I shall remember that wonderful voyage as long as I live.

We sailed right down the west coast of Africa, calling in at the Canary Isles (of course I thought of Doctor Doolittle’s adventures there with the pirates, though nothing so exciting happened to me). Then we rounded the Cape of Good Hope, called in at Cape Town and Durban, and finally Beira. I wanted the trip to go on forever. I loved being up on deck, where I watched the sea and glimpsed dolphins, sharks, and flying fish. I especially loved it when it was rough and most passengers were in their cabins. I was lucky. I never felt seasick.

The South African towns of Cape Town and Durban were very beautiful. But I hated the practice of apartheid—the legal separation of blacks and whites. It was awful to see seats at a bus stop marked “Slegs Blancs”— Afrikaans for “Whites Only.” The same signs were on the bathing beaches, the restaurants—almost everywhere.

Twenty-one days after leaving London we steamed into Mombasa, the coastal port of Kenya. I had arrived. I had no idea what lay ahead, but I knew it would be exciting.

I went by train to Nairobi, the capital city of Kenya. It was a two-day train ride, so I got to see some of the countryside and, even from a distance, some wild animals. But none of it seemed real then—it was like seeing a movie landscape.

In Nairobi I was met by Clo. On our way to her farm I saw my first giraffe close up. He stood on his long legs in the middle of the dirt road, his long neck towering above the car, and looked down his long nose at us. His beautiful dark eyes were fringed with long lashes. He was chewing acacia thorns, and I could see that his long tongue was almost black. Finally he turned and cantered away. It looked as though he ran in slow motion. When I saw him, that amazing long, long animal, I finally knew, for sure, that I was really there. I had actually gotten to the Africa of my dreams—the Africa of Doctor Doolittle and Tarzan.

I spent three wonderful weeks on Clo’s farm in a part of Kenya called the Kinankop, or White Highlands. Then I had to move to Nairobi to start my temporary job. I’ve always felt it is an unforgivable thing to dump yourself on friends and then just stay on and on, sponging on their hospitality. So when I was still in England, we had arranged for my job with a big company that had a branch in Kenya. It was very boring, but I could earn my own money and be independent while I tried to find a way to work somehow with animals.

After two months I met the man who made all my dreams come true. “If you are interested in animals,” someone told me, “you must meet Louis Leakey.” Leakey was an anthropologist and paleontologist who was interested in animals and Early Man. So I made an appointment and went to see him in his big, untidy office, strewn with papers, fossil bones, teeth, stone tools, and all kinds of other things—including a big cage in which lived a minute mouse with her six babies.

Louis offered me a job immediately—his secretary had just given her notice. What amazing luck! I think he would have found work for me anyway, because he was impressed by how much I knew about African animals.

Louis took me around Nairobi National Park. Being with him was a wonderful experience. He had all kinds of fascinating stories about animals he’d seen during his years of living in Kenya. He knew perhaps more than any white man about the Kikuyu, too, since his missionary father had allowed him to grow up almost as part of the tribe. When he was two days old he was set outside the house in his crib, and in accordance with Kikuyu

custom, all the elders of the tribe walked past to give him their blessing. To do this each of them spat on him! Later, as an adolescent, he went through the initiation rights with the other Kikuyu boys with whom he had grown up.

Before I started to work in the museum, Louis and his wife Mary took Gillian, another girl who worked at the museum, and me on an expedition. We went to Olduvai Gorge in Tanganyika.

That was one of the most exciting adventures in my life. In 1957, Olduvai Gorge, which is now famous, was known to very few white people. There was no road leading there—not even a track. When we left the trail from Ngorongoro Crater to Seronera (a trail that is now a well-marked road across the Serengeti plains), Gillian and I had to sit up on the roof of the over-loaded Land Rover to look for the faint tire marks left by the Leakeys the year before. They had been going for three or four months every summer to look for fossils. They already knew a great deal about the prehistoric creatures that roamed the Serengeti in bygone years. They knew that apelike men had lived there, too. They had found many of their simple stone tools but, at that time, none of their bones had been discovered.

After a long journey, during which we had stopped twice to set up camp, we arrived at the gorge. There, under some shady acacia trees, we set up the tents that would be home for the next three months. Presently the big truck arrived, loaded with more equipment and the African field staff who would help with the digging.

It was nearly dark by the time they had their tents up. Louis and Mary slept in the truck, once it was empty. They put their two beds into it and a few boxes to use as tables and storage compartments. The truck became a sort of camper.

As we sat around our campfire that evening, eating a scratch meal from tins, I heard the distant, grunting roar of a lion. And later, as I lay on my little cot, I heard a strange, high-pitched sound that I later learned was the “giggling” of hyenas squabbling over some prey.

I had never been so happy. There I was, far, far from any human dwellings, out in the wilds of Africa, with animals all around me in the night. Wild, free animals. That was what I had dreamed of all my life.

Digging for fossils under the hot tropical sun was very hard work. The African team prepared the site by using picks and shovels to remove the topsoil. Once they got down near the layer of fossils that Louis and Mary wanted to work on, Mary insisted on doing the last of the heavy work herself. If an important fossil got broken by a pick, it was better that she should do it than one of the Africans. I was strong and very healthy, and I offered to help her. We got on well together, sweating away as we swung the heavy implements.





















The Author at Olduvai Gorge. Louis Leakey is standing on the left.



Once we were down to the fossil “bed” we chipped away at the hard soil with hunting knives, searching for bones. Once we found a bone, we used dental picks (the same kind dentists use in your mouth) to carefully free the precious relic from its resting place. The final cleaning was done back in Nairobi.

I always remember the first time I held in my hand the bone of a creature that had walked the earth millions of years before. I had dug it up myself. A feeling of awe crept over me. I thought, “Once this creature stood here. It was alive, had flesh and hair. It had its own smell. It could feel hunger and thirst and pain. It could enjoy the early morning sun.”

In the afternoon we all gathered for an hour under a grass roof whose walls were criss-crossed poles. There we sorted through our morning finds. We gave each one a number, then stored it carefully away.

Two years later the Leakeys found the skull of an apelike creature who became known as Dear Boy or George. He was also called the Nutcracker Man because he had such large teeth and thick, strong jaws. His official name is Australopithecus robustus.

Before his skull was dug up, no remains of any humanlike creature had been discovered at Olduvai, although people searching there had found plenty of evidence to show that such creatures had lived there long, long ago. I myself had found ancient stone tools, very crude and primitive, that had probably been used as hammers. Dear Boy, at last, gave Louis and Mary some idea of what the hammer-wielder must have looked like.

I am so glad that I knew Olduvai before that famous discovery. It was so wild and so remote when I was there. Every day, after work was finished, Gillian and I were allowed to wander off on our own. Once we almost bumped into a black rhino. Rhinos are very shortsighted, and he knew something was wrong. He snorted and pawed the ground before turning and trotting off, tail held high in the air.

Another time I had a sort of prickly feeling in my back. I turned around and there was a young male lion, about ninety feet away, gazing at Gillian and me with much interest. “We must walk calmly across the gorge and climb up onto the plain,” I told Gillian. She, however, wanted to hide away from the lion in the thick undergrowth at the bottom of the gorge. In the end we did what I wanted. The lion followed for about three hundred feet, then stood and watched as we climbed up into the open. Later, Louis told me we had done the right thing.

I hated leaving when the three months were up. We all did. My only consolation was that I could continue to work for Louis and to learn about animals.

I quickly settled down to my new job when we got back to Nairobi. Not only did I work all day at a desk in Louis’s cluttered office, but I moved into one of the museum staff flats. There I could be with a group of people who were all really knowledgeable about African mammals, birds, reptiles, and insects. What a lot I learned during those days!

My friend Sally came out from England to share the flat with me. She had become a teacher, and she taught five- to six-year-old children at a nearby school.

It was not long before we had a collection of animals. People kept bringing them to me: animals who had been orphaned and needed a home, animals who had been rescued from African markets. First came a bush baby, Levi.

A bush baby, or galago, is a small, squirrel-like animal related to a monkey. Bush babies have huge ears, large, round eyes, and long, bushy tails. They make a loud wailing sound at night that, to some people, sounds like the crying of babies. There are several different species—Levi was one of the smaller varieties.

In the daytime he was mostly asleep in a large gourd on top of a cupboard in Louis’s office. Sometimes, if Louis had a visitor, Levi woke up when he heard the strange voice. He would peer sleepily out of the gourd, gaze down, and then take a flying leap and land on the newcomer’s shoulders. One man, I’m sure, almost had a heart attack from fright! Louis never minded—he said that people in Africa should always be prepared for anything to happen! In the evening Levi leapt around the room catching insects attracted to the lights. He also ate a lot of fruit and mealworms. I often left the door open, but he never went away—though he sometimes visited the other residents of the museum flats and startled them as he leapt through door or window in pursuit of some insect.

















Levi, the bush baby.



I next acquired a vervet monkey, Kobi, and a dwarf mongoose, Kip. Both were tied onto stalls at a local market. They became very fond of each other, and Kobi often sat holding Kip in his arms. Then came a wife for Kobi, named Lettuce, and a wife for Kip, known simply as Mrs. Kip. Somehow we got a hedgehog, and Sally contributed a white and black rat, rescued from the school lab during vacation.

There were some more conventional pets, too: Tana, a beautiful white and lemon cocker spaniel who was given to me, and Hobo, a springer spaniel I looked after for a friend. There was also a Siamese cat, Nanky-Poo.

As often as possible Sally and I would get into my old car, call all the animals, and drive out to the Langata Forest, near where Louis Leakey and his family lived. I would open the car door and all the animals would tumble out—except Nanky-Poo, who stayed in the car, and the rat and the hedgehog, who stayed at home. But the moment I started the engine, they all came running back.

I always hoped my monkeys would wander off to live in the forest, but they never did. Once an animal has been caught and tamed, it is very hard for it to go back to the wild. Only two of our animals did—the hedgehog, whom I freed when it was fully grown, and Mrs. Kip. Kip himself refused to leave. In fact I had him the longest of all my animals, for he came back to England

with me and lived in Bournemouth for many years, with the run of house and garden.

It is almost never a good thing to keep wild animals as pets. They are adapted to live in the wild. They can’t cope with human ways as our dogs and cats can. And almost always they come to sad ends. Kip, I’m afraid, got out into the street on a cold November night and simply vanished. He must have died so miserable and cold. Danny, who adored him, and who had accidentally let him out, almost died too—she went off searching for him and stayed out for hours. We found her blue and shivering with cold. She had to be given brandy and put to bed. She was well over eighty at the time.

Of course, even cats and dogs can come to tragic ends. It was not long after I had met Louis Leakey that he took me with him to search for the body of an Irish wolfhound who, her owner said, had been taken by a leopard the night before. Louis, skilled in bush lore, followed the leopard’s tracks and the trail of dried blood, until we found the body of the huge dog. It had been dragged some way up a tree. We knew that the leopard, who had not eaten very much, was somewhere nearby. The hair stood up on the back of my neck as I vainly looked among the branches and into the tangled undergrowth all around.

Louis had earlier organized a plan to capture leopards who made trouble around people’s homes and release them in one of the national parks.

He directed a truck to bring a big, live trap to within about three hundred feet of the dead hound, which was then dragged across the ground and put into the trap. Louis hoped the leopard would follow the trail, enter the trap, and thus be captured. The plan worked perfectly. The next morning Louis took me to watch as the leopard, in his trap, was loaded into the truck for the long drive to his new hunting grounds. He was so beautiful, so terrified, so defiantly brave as he spat and snarled at his human captors through the bars. I hope he made it in his new home. But leopards are territorial, and he would have had to battle with at least one other male before he could carve out a home range for himself.

When I’d been working at the museum for nine months, I had saved up enough money to give Mum a surprise—I sent her a check that would pay

for her to visit me. All my life, up to that time, she had been doing things for me. Now, at last, I could do something for her.

She came out by plane. She loved Africa, as I had known she would. She loved meeting all my human and animal friends. Very quickly she made many friends of her own and was invited all over the place. She got to see a lot of Kenya during the short time she was there.

We talked about my future. Louis never minded if his scientific staff had higher degrees or not: The important thing, as far as he was concerned, was that they had knowledge and were hardworking and dedicated. So I could have gone on at the museum. Or I could have learned a whole lot more about fossils and become a paleontologist.

But both those careers had to do with dead animals. And I still wanted to work with living animals. My childhood dream was as strong as ever: Somehow I must find a way to watch free, wild animals living their own, undisturbed lives. I wanted to learn things that no one else knew, uncover secrets through patient observation. I wanted to come as close to talking to animals as I could, to be like Doctor Doolittle. I wanted to move among them without fear, like Tarzan.

From time to time, ever since we’d come back from Olduvai, Louis had talked about some chimpanzees living on the shores of a far-off lake in Tanganyika. They were much stronger than men, he said. It might be dangerous to study them. It would certainly be difficult. But he was anxious to find out about their lives. Perhaps, he thought, knowing how they lived would help him to understand more about the way our own Stone Age ancestors lived. For chimpanzees and humans are biologically very closely related, indeed.

Because I had no training, no degree, no experience, I had not imagined that I could be chosen for such a study. But of course, I desperately wanted to try. One day I told Louis so.





























The author and Louis Leakey.



“I’ve been waiting for you to tell me that,” he said, his eyes twinkling. “Why did you think I talked about those chimpanzees to you?” He told me that it didn’t matter about my lack of experience or my lack of a degree. He wanted to send someone who had a mind “uncluttered by theories,” someone who would watch carefully and record accurately. He preferred someone who truly wanted to live among the apes and learn about their behavior to someone who simply wanted an academic degree. Above all, he said, he needed someone who had endless patience.

Obviously, I was that person! This was what I had been so long waiting for, the kind of thing I had come to Africa hoping to do. Louis warned me that it would be a long and difficult task. He told me that if I succeeded, I would have to go to a university and get a degree. And he told me that before I could begin, he would have to try to find the money I would need.

We decided it would be best if I went back to England to learn all I could about chimpanzees while he tried to raise the money. Mum and I went back together on a boat, through the Suez Canal, calling at Aden and Barcelona. So when I got back to London, a year after setting out, I had been all around the African continent.







CHAPTER 5






It was a whole year from the time when I left Africa to the time when I actually arrived among the chimpanzees. Sometimes, as month followed month, I felt sure I would never get there. Surely, I told myself, it’s all too good to be true.

Once I got back to England I got a job at the London Zoo. I didn’t work directly with the animals, but I helped in the television film library there. At the same time I spent hours watching the chimpanzees. There was a beautiful male, called Dick, and two females. But Dick had been shut up in a small cage for so long that he was almost mad. He would sit in a corner and seem to be counting his fingers while his mouth opened and shut, opened and shut. I made a vow to myself that one day I would try to help chimps in zoos to have a better life.

I read everything I could about chimps, but almost all of it was about chimps in labs or in people’s homes. Only one man had tried to watch them in the wild. He had done this for only two and a half months and had not learned much. But the more I read the more I realized how intelligent chimpanzees really are. Everyone agreed that they are more like human beings than any other creature alive today. How lucky I was, I thought, to be going to study them for months and months in their own forest home.


















London Zoo. Dick counting his fingers.



At last Louis wrote to say that he had managed to get enough money for me to begin my study. He had also managed to get the British government official in Tanganyika (which is now Tanzania, after its merger with Zanzibar) to agree that I could work in the Gombe Stream Game Reserve. In 1960, Tanganyika was still under British colonial rule, and Louis said it had been very difficult to get this permission. In those days it was not thought at all safe for a young, single girl to go into the wilds of Africa and study animals. In fact, Louis was told that I would not be allowed to go by myself. I had to choose a companion.

Well, I chose Mum. She was thrilled to come. She had loved Africa and was longing to go back. She also wanted to help me get started in my new venture. She would not be able to stay much longer than three or four months, but we hoped that the authorities would get used to me during this time and let me stay on alone.

With great excitement we packed and flew out to Nairobi. Louis met us and took us to a hotel where we would stay while everything was prepared for the expedition.

What a lot we had to get ready! All our camping gear—tent, bedding, cooking things. Cans of food. Drab clothes for me so I would blend in with

the greens and browns of the forest. Binoculars. And lots of notebooks and paper for writing up my notes.

Then came a terrible disappointment. Louis had received a long telegram from the head of the Game Department in Tanganyika. He informed us that there were fishermen who were fighting over who should fish from which beach along the lake shore of the Game Reserve. It was not safe for Miss Goodall and her mother. We must delay our safari.

Louis knew how disappointed I was. He arranged for Mum and me to use his little motorboat on Lake Victoria, in Kenya. We would be taken to an uninhabited island, Lolue, where I could watch vervet monkeys. It would be good practice and would give me some experience in how to approach and observe wild monkeys.

After a train ride, we settled into the lovely little boat and set off on the trip to Lolue Island. The captain was a wonderful African, Hassan. He was helped by the much younger Hamisi.

I loved watching those monkeys. It took only about ten days before I could get quite close to the troop I chose to watch.

The island, which was about nine square miles, had a thick belt of quite dense bush around the edge. The middle was grass covered, with a few low trees and some big rocks. Mostly I stayed in the grassy part and watched the monkeys as they moved about in the trees and low bushes. When it was hot in the middle of the day, they moved deeper into the forest belt, toward the lake. One day, when I had been there nearly two weeks and the monkeys were quite used to me, I decided to try to follow them into the forest to see what they did.

I was going slowly along one of the tunnels made by hippos, through the thick undergrowth where they move inland to graze at night, when I heard something moving toward me. Hoping it wasn’t a hippo, I crept into the bushes. Hippos can be dangerous, especially when frightened. There was no breeze in the dense vegetation. My scent would hang heavily in the air and betray my presence to any animal nearby.

When I finally saw what was approaching, my heart gave a great thump. It was much more frightening than any hippo. It was an African, dressed only in a loincloth, with a spear in one hand. I knew at once that he was one of the crocodile poachers that Hassan had told me about. And I knew that he could not fail to see me as he passed.

So I stepped out into the hippo tunnel and said, “Jambo”—“How are you?” The man stopped as if I had hit him and, quick as lightning, raised his arm. The tip of the spear was pointed directly toward me. He seemed ready to impale me. But suddenly, perhaps because he saw I was just a white girl, he lowered his spear. I began to breathe again! He was very angry. He shouted at me. I couldn’t understand all he said, but I did gather that he would kill me if he saw me there again!—and that I should leave the island as quickly as possible. Finally, he went away.

I didn’t feel like watching monkeys anymore that day. I went to the edge of the lake and signaled for Hassan to come and fetch me. When Hassan heard what had happened, he was very angry. He immediately rowed around the island to the poachers’ camp and talked to them. Finally they said they would leave me alone if I kept to my part of the island and never went near their camp. I was ready enough to stick to this arrangement. But I never really trusted them, and whenever I went after the monkeys along the dimly lit hippo tunnels, I was always expecting to see a sinister human shape lurking there.

After nearly four weeks I had learned quite a lot about the monkeys. Then, when Hassan came to fetch me one evening, he told me that a message had come through on the radio with the news that I could now go to Gombe. I went back to the island one more day—I felt I had to take my leave of the little monkeys I had come to love—Pierre and Maggie and Lucy and her little baby Grock, who had been born a few days before. And then, early the next morning, we set off back to the mainland.

Everything was ready for us to go, once we got back to Nairobi. The botanist from the museum, Bernard Verdcout, was driving Mum and me to Kigoma, the nearest town to Gombe and the chimps. Once we had loaded everything into his Land Rover, it was so full I was surprised it moved at all!

The journey took three days. Much of the drive was through woodland infested with tsetse flies. When we stopped during the day the flies, which had been following the car, dived down on us in search of blood. They are ugly gray insects, with such quick flight that they are hard to kill. Their bites are painful. In some areas they can give you sleeping sickness.

At last we reached Kigoma. We checked in at the little hotel, washed, and then went to visit the regional commissioner, the head of government there. We had simply gone to introduce ourselves. But after greeting us the commissioner looked serious. “I’m sorry. I can’t allow you to go on to Gombe now,” he said. “There has been a terrible rebellion among the Africans across the lake in the Belgian Congo. They are killing many white people. We don’t know how the Tanganyika Africans will react—they might also decide to rebel. Until we know, you must stay in Kigoma.”

Would I ever get to study the chimpanzees?

We went back to the hotel. We soon found that Kigoma was filled with refugees from the Congo (now known as Zaire). Many of them had seen family or friends killed and had rushed away, leaving everything behind them. Some of them were wounded. It was a sad and depressing time.

Most of the refugees were being looked after in a huge Belgian-owned building close to the lake shore. All the people living in Kigoma got together to help.

Two days later more refugees arrived. Luckily, by then many of the first arrivals had left Kigoma. Even so, things were getting crowded. Mum, Bernard, and I all moved into one room so that a few extra homeless people could stay in the hotel. Soon after that, we moved out of the hotel altogether. We camped near the lake and felt a bit better. The Kigoma people were very kind and invited us in for meals and baths.

At long last the British authorities decided it was safe for us to go to Gombe. Bernard stayed until we had stowed all our gear on the government launch that would take us along the lake. Bernard told me later that he thought he might never see us again—he thought we were crazy, that the plan to study the chimps was highly dangerous. Afterward I learned that

many other people had thought the same as Bernard. Luckily, Louis had not listened to any of them!

The launch cast off and began chugging northward along the lake shore. Finally we were on the last stage of the long journey from England, via Lake Victoria, to Chimpanzee Land!







CHAPTER 6






July 16, 1960, was a day I shall remember all my life. It was when I first set foot on the shingle and sand beach of Chimpanzee Land—that is, Gombe National Park. I was twenty-six years old.

Mum and I were greeted by the two African game scouts who were responsible for protecting the thirty square miles of the park. They helped us to find a place where we could put up our old ex-army tent.

We chose a lovely spot under some shady trees near the small, fast-flowing Kakombe Stream. In Kigoma (before setting out), we had found a cook, Dominic. He put up his little tent some distance from ours and quite near the lake.

When camp was ready I set off to explore. It was already late afternoon, so I could not go far. There had been a grass fire not long before, so all the vegetation of the more open ridges and peaks had burned away. This made it quite easy to move around, except that the slopes above the valley were very steep in places, and I slipped several times on the loose, gravelly soil.


















The author and her mother, Vanne Goodall, in Gombe. Photograph by Hugo van Lawick, © National Geographic Society.



I shall never forget the thrill of that first exploration. Soon after leaving camp I met a troop of baboons. They were afraid of the strange, white-skinned creature (that was I) and gave their barking alarm call, “Waa-hoo! Waa-hoo”! again and again. I left them, hoping that they would become used to me soon—otherwise, I thought, all the creatures of Gombe would be frightened. As I crossed a narrow ravine crowded with low trees and bushes I got very close to a beautiful red-gold bushbuck—a forest antelope about the size of a long-legged goat. I knew it was female because she had no horns. When she scented me she kept quite still for a moment and stared toward me with her big dark eyes. Then, with a loud barking call, she turned and bounded away.

When I got to one of the high ridges I looked down into the valley. There the forest was dark and thick. That was where I planned to go the next day to look for chimpanzees.

When I got back to camp it was dusk. Dominic had made a fire and was cooking our supper. That evening, and for the next four days, we had fresh food from Kigoma, but after that we ate out of cans. Louis had not managed to find very much money for our expedition, so our possessions were few and simple—a knife, fork, and spoon each, a couple of tin plates and tin

mugs. But that was all we needed. After supper, Mum and I talked around our campfire, then snuggled into our two cots in the tent.

Early the next morning I set out to search for chimpanzees. I had been told by the British game ranger in charge of Gombe not to travel about the mountains by myself—except near camp. Otherwise, I had to take one of the game scouts with me. So I set off with Adolf. That first day we saw two chimps feeding in a tall tree. As soon as they saw us they leapt down and vanished. The next day we saw no chimps at all. Nor the day after. Nor the day after that.

A whole week went by before we found a very big tree full of tiny round red fruits that Adolf told me were called msulula. From the other side of the valley we could watch chimps arriving at the tree, feeding, then climbing down and vanishing into the forest. I decided to camp in the best viewing site so that I could see them first thing in the morning. I spent three days in that valley and I saw a lot of chimps. But they were too far away and the foliage of the tree was too thick. It was disappointing and frustrating, and I didn’t have much to tell Mum when I got back.

There was another problem that I had to cope with—Adolf was very lazy. He was almost always late in the morning. I decided to try another man, Rashidi. He was far better and helped me a lot, showing me the trails through the forests and the best ways to move from one valley to the next. He had sharp eyes and spotted chimps from far away.

But even after several months, the chimps had not become used to us. They ran off if we got anywhere near to them. I begged the game ranger to let me move about the forests by myself. I promised that I would always tell Rashidi in which direction I was going, so that he would know where to look for me if I failed to turn up in the evening. The game ranger finally gave in. At last I could make friends with the chimpanzees in my own way.

Every morning I got up when I heard the alarm clock at 5:30 A.M. I ate a couple of slices of bread and had a cup of coffee from the Thermos flask. Then I set off, climbing to where I thought the chimps might be.

Most often, I went to the Peak. I discovered that from this high place I had a splendid view in all directions. I could see chimps moving in the trees and I could hear if they called. At first I watched from afar, through my binoculars, and never tried to get close. I knew that if I did, the chimps would run silently away.

Gradually I began to learn about the chimps’ home and how they lived. I discovered that, most of the time, the chimps wandered about in small groups of six or less, not in a big troop like the baboons. Often a little group was made up of a mother with her children, or two or three adult males by themselves. Sometimes many groups joined together, especially when there was delicious ripe fruit on one big tree. When the chimps got together like that, they were very excited, made a lot of noise, and were easy to find.

Eventually I realized that the chimps I watched from the Peak were all part of one group—a community. There were about fifty chimps belonging to this community. They made use of three of the valleys to the north of the Kakombe Valley (where our tent was) and two valleys to the south. These valleys have lovely sounding names: Kasakela, Linda, and Rutanga in the north, Mkenke and Nyasanga in the south.

From the Peak I noted which trees the chimps were feeding in and then, when they had gone, I scrambled down and collected some of the leaves, flowers, or fruits so they could be identified later. I found that the chimps eat mostly fruits but also a good many kinds of leaves, blossoms, seeds, and stems. Later I would discover that they eat a variety of insects and sometimes hunt and kill prey animals to feed on meat.

During those months of gradual discovery, the chimps very slowly began to realize that I was not so frightening after all. Even so, it was almost a year before I could approach to within one hundred yards, and that is not really very close. The baboons got used to me much more quickly. Indeed, they became a nuisance around our camp by grabbing any food that we accidentally left lying on the table.

I began to learn more about the other creatures that shared the forests with the chimpanzees. There were four kinds of monkeys in addition to the baboons, and many smaller animals such as squirrels and mongooses. There

was also a whole variety of nocturnal (nighttime) creatures: porcupines and civets (creatures looking rather like raccoons) and all manners of rats and mice. Only a very few animals in the forests at Gombe were potentially dangerous—mainly buffalo and leopards. Bush pigs can be dangerous too, but only if you threaten them or their young. And, of course, there are poisonous snakes—seven different kinds.

Once, as I arrived on the Peak in the early morning before it was properly light, I saw the dark shape of a large animal looming in front of me. I stood quite still. My heart began to beat fast, for I realized it was a buffalo. Many hunters fear buffalo more than lions or elephants.

By a lucky chance the wind was blowing from him to me, so he couldn’t smell me. He was peacefully gazing in the opposite direction and chewing his cud. He hadn’t heard my approach—always I try to move as quietly as I can in the bush. So, though I was only ten yards from him, he had no idea I was there. Very slowly I retreated.

Another time, as I was sitting on the Peak, I heard a strange mewing sound. I looked around and there, about fifteen yards away, a leopard was approaching. I could just see the black and white tip of its tail above the tall grass. It was walking along the little trail that led directly to where I sat.

Leopards are not usually dangerous unless they have been wounded. But I was frightened of them in those days—probably as a result of my experience with the leopard and the wolfhound two years before. And so, very silently, I moved away and looked for chimps in another valley.

Later I went back to the Peak. I found that, just like any cat, that leopard had been very curious. There, in the exact place where I had been sitting, he had left his mark—his droppings.

Most of the time, though, nothing more alarming than insects disturbed my vigils on the Peak. It began to feel like home. I carried a little tin trunk up there. In it I kept a kettle, some sugar and coffee, and a tin mug. Then, when I got tired from a long trek to another valley, I could make a drink in the middle of the day. I kept a blanket up there, too, and when the chimps slept near the Peak, I slept there, so that I could be close by in the morning. I

loved to be up there at night, especially when there was a moon. If I heard the coughing grunt of a leopard, I just prayed and pulled the blanket over my head!

Chimps sleep all night, just as we do. From the Peak I often watched how they made their nests, or beds. First the chimp bent a branch down over some solid foundation, such as a fork or two parallel branches. Holding it in place with his feet, he then bent another over it. Then he folded the end of the first branch back over the second. And so on. He often ended up by picking lots of small, soft, leafy twigs to make a pillow. Chimps like their comfort! I’ve learned over the years that infants sleep in their nest with their mothers until they are about five years old or until the next baby is born and the older child has to make its own bed.

I never returned to camp before sunset. But even when I slept on the Peak, I first went down to have supper with Mum and tell her what I had seen that day. And she would tell me what she had been doing.

Mum set up a clinic. She handed out medicine to any of the local Africans, mostly fishermen, who were sick. Once she cured an old man who was very ill indeed. Word about this cure spread far and wide, and sometimes patients would walk for miles to get treatment from the wonderful white woman-doctor.

Her clinic was very good for me. It meant that the local people realized we wanted to help. When Mum had to go back to England after four months to manage things at home, the Africans wanted, in turn, to help me.

Of course, Mum worried about leaving me on my own. Dominic was a wonderful cook and great company, but he did sometimes get very drunk. He was not really reliable. So Louis Leakey asked Hassan to come all the way from Lake Victoria to help with the boat and engine. It was lovely to see his handsome, smiling face again, and his arrival relieved Mum’s mind no end.

Of course, I missed her after she’d gone, but I didn’t have time to be lonely. There was so much to do.

Soon after she’d left, I got back one evening and was greeted by an excited Dominic. He told me that a big male chimp had spent an hour feeding on the fruit of one of the oil-nut palms growing in the camp clearing. Afterward he had climbed down, gone over to my tent, and taken the bananas that had just been put there for my supper.

This was fantastic news. For months the chimps had been running off when they saw me—now one had actually visited my camp! Perhaps he would come again.

The next day I waited, in case he did. What a luxury to lie in until 7:00 A.M. As the hours went by I began to fear that the chimp wouldn’t come. But finally, at about four in the afternoon, I heard a rustling in the undergrowth opposite my tent, and a black shape appeared on the other side of the clearing.

I recognized him at once. It was the handsome male with the dense white beard. I had already named him David Greybeard. Quite calmly he climbed into the palm and feasted on its nuts. And then he helped himself to the bananas I had set out for him.



















David Greybeard. Photograph by Hugo van Lawick, © National Geographic Society.



There were ripe palm nuts on that tree for another five days, and David Greybeard visited three more times and got lots of bananas.

A month later, when another palm tree in camp bore ripe fruit, David again visited us. And on one of those occasions he actually took a banana from my hand. I could hardly believe it.

From that time on things got easier for me. Sometimes when I met David Greybeard out in the forest, he would come up to see if I had a banana hidden in my pocket. The other chimps stared with amazement. Obviously I wasn’t as dangerous as they had thought. Gradually they allowed me closer and closer.

It was David Greybeard who provided me with my most exciting observation. One morning, near the Peak, I came upon him squatting on a termite mound. As I watched, he picked a blade of grass, poked it into a tunnel in the mound, and then withdrew it. The grass was covered with termites all clinging on with their jaws. He picked them off with his lips and scrunched them up. Then he fished for more. When his piece of grass got bent, he dropped it, picked up a little twig, stripped the leaves off it, and used that.

I was really thrilled. David had used objects as tools! He had also changed a twig into something more suitable for fishing termites. He had actually made a tool. Before this observation, scientists had thought that only humans could make tools. Later I would learn that chimpanzees use more objects as tools than any creature except for us. This finding excited Louis Leakey more than any other.

In October the dry season ended and it began to rain. Soon the golden mountain slopes were covered with lush green grass. Flowers appeared, and the air smelled lovely. Most days it rained just a little. Sometimes there was a downpour. I loved being out in the forest in the rain. And I loved the cool evenings when I could lace the tent shut and make it cozy inside with a storm lantern. The only trouble was that everything got damp and grew mold. Scorpions and giant poisonous centipedes sometimes appeared in the tent—even, a few times, a snake. But I was lucky—I never got stung or bitten.

The chimpanzees often seemed miserable in the rain. They looked cold, and they shivered. Since they were clever enough to use tools, I was surprised that they had not learned to make shelters. Many of them got coughs and colds. Often, during heavy rain, they seemed irritable and bad tempered.

Once, as I walked through thick forest in a downpour, I suddenly saw a chimp hunched in front of me. Quickly I stopped. Then I heard a sound from above. I looked up and there was a big chimp there, too. When he saw me he gave a loud, clear wailing wraaaah—a spine-chilling call that is used to threaten a dangerous animal. To my right I saw a large black hand shaking a branch and bright eyes glaring threateningly through the foliage. Then came another savage wraaaah from behind. Up above, the big male began to sway the vegetation. I was surrounded. I crouched down, trying to appear as nonthreatening as possible.

Suddenly a chimp charged straight toward me. His hair bristled with rage. At the last minute he swerved and ran off. I stayed still. Two more chimps charged nearby. Then, suddenly, I realized I was alone again. All the chimps had gone.

Only then did I realize how frightened I had been. When I stood up my legs were trembling! Male chimps, although they are only four feet tall when upright, are at least three times stronger than a grown man. And I weighed only about ninety pounds. I had become very thin with so much climbing in the mountains and only one meal a day. That incident took place soon after the chimps had lost their initial terror of me but before they had learned to accept me calmly as part of their forest world. If David Greybeard had been among them, they probably would not have behaved like that, I thought.

After my long days in the forests I looked forward to supper. Dominic always had it ready for me when I got back in the evenings. Once a month he went into Kigoma with Hassan. They came back with new supplies, including fresh vegetables and fruit and eggs. And they brought my mail— that was something I really looked forward to.

After supper I would get out the little notebook in which I had scribbled everything I had seen while watching the chimps during the day. I would settle down to write it all legibly into my journal. It was very important to do that every evening, while it was all fresh in my mind. Even on days when I climbed back to sleep near the chimps, I always wrote up my journal first.

Gradually, as the weeks went by, I began to recognize more and more chimpanzees as individuals. Some, like Goliath, William, and old Flo, I got to know well, because David Greybeard sometimes brought them with him when he visited camp. I always had a supply of bananas ready in case the chimps arrived.

Once you have been close to chimps for a while they are as easy to tell apart as your classmates. Their faces look different, and they have different characters. David Greybeard, for example, was a calm chimp who liked to keep out of trouble. But he was also very determined to get his own way. If he arrived in camp and couldn’t find any bananas, he would walk into my tent and search. Afterward, all was chaos. It looked as though some burglar had raided the place! Goliath had a much more excitable, impetuous temperament. William, with his long-shaped face, was shy and timid.

Old Flo was easy to identify. She had a bulbous nose and ragged ears. She came to camp with her infant daughter, whom I named Fifi, and her juvenile son, Figan. Sometimes adolescent Faben came, too. It was from Flo that I first learned that in the wild, female chimps have only one baby every five or six years. The older offspring, even after they have become independent, still spend a lot of time with their mothers, and all the different family members help one another.




















The author and David Greybeard. Photograph by Hugo van Lawick, © National Geographic Society.



Flo also taught me that female chimps do not have just one mate. One day she came to my camp with a junk swelling on her rump. This was a sign that she was ready for mating. She was followed by a long line of suitors. Many of them had never visited my camp before, and they were scared. But they were so attracted to Flo that they overcame their fear in order to keep close to her. She allowed them all to mate with her at different times.

Soon after the chimps had begun to visit my camp, the National Geographic Society, which was giving Louis money for my research, sent a photographer to Gombe to make a film. Hugo van Lawick was a Dutch baron. He loved and respected animals just as I did, and he made a wonderful movie. One year later, in England, we got married.

By then I had left Gombe for a while, to start my own studies at Cambridge University. I hated to leave, but I knew I would soon be back. I had promised Louis that I would work hard and get my Ph.D. degree.

After I got the degree, Hugo and I went back to Gombe together. It was a very exciting time, as Flo has just had a baby, little Flint. That was the first

wild chimpanzee infant that I ever saw close up, nearly four years after I had begun my research.

Flo came very often to camp looking for bananas. Fifi, now six years old, and Figan, five years older, were still always with her. Fifi loved her new baby brother. When he was four months old she was allowed to play with and groom him. Sometimes Flo let her carry him when they moved through the forest. During that time, Fifi learned a lot about how to be a good mother.




















Fifi looking for the bananas we sometimes hid under our shirts. Photograph by Hugo van Lawick, © National Geographic Society.



Flint learned to walk and climb when he was six months old. And he learned to ride on his mother’s back during travel, instead of always clinging on underneath. He gradually spent more time playing with his two older brothers. They were always very gentle with him. So were other youngsters of the community. They had to be, for if Flo thought any other chimps were too rough, she would charge over and threaten or even attack them.

I watched how Flint gradually learned to use more and more of the different calls and gestures that chimpanzees use to communicate with each other. Some of these gestures are just like ours—holding hands, embracing, kissing, patting one another on the back. They mean about the same, too. And although they do not make up a language the way human words do, all the different calls do help the chimpanzees know what is happening, even if they are far away when they hear the sounds. Each call (there are at least thirty, perhaps more), means something different.

Flo was the top-ranked female of her community and could dominate all the others. But she could not boss any of the males. In chimpanzee society,

males are the dominant sex. Among the males themselves, there is a social order, and one male at the top is the boss.

The first top-ranking male I knew was Goliath. Then, in 1964, Mike took over. He did this by using his brain. He would gather up one or two empty kerosene cans from my camp and hit and kick them ahead of him as he charged toward a group of adult males. It was a spectacular performance and made a lot of noise. The other chimps fled. So Mike didn’t need to fight to get to the top—which was just as well, as he was a very small chimp. He was top male for six years.

The adult males spend a lot of time in each other’s company. They often patrol the boundaries of their territory and may attack chimpanzees of different communities if they meet. These conflicts are very brutal, and the victim may die. Only young females can move from one community to another without being hurt. In fact, the big males sometimes go out looking for such females and try to take them back into their own territory.

As the months went by, I learned more and more. I recorded more and more details when I watched the chimpanzees. Instead of writing the information in notebooks, I started to use a little tape recorder. Then I could keep my eyes on the chimps all the time. By the end of each day there was so much typing to be done that I found I couldn’t do it all myself. I needed an assistant to help. Soon, with even more chimps coming to camp, I needed other people to help with the observations.

There were always more fascinating things to watch and record, more people to help write everything down. What had started as a little camp for Mum and me ended up, six years later, as a research center, where students could come and collect information for their degrees. I was the director.

In 1967, something special happened. For me it was the most important event of my life. I had a baby of my own.







CHAPTER 7






The Africans said my son should have been called Simba, Swahili for lion. This is why. Just before he was born, I was camping with Hugo in Ngorongoro Crater. The crater is the inside of a giant volcano that blew its top off millions of years ago. Now it is one hundred square miles of grassland and trees, a lake, and some little rivers. It is one of the most beautiful places in the world. And it is famous for its wildlife, especially its beautiful black-maned lions.

One evening, Hugo and I were waiting for our cook, Anyango, to walk over with supper. Suddenly the quiet African night was filled with shouting, then with banging and clattering sounds as though someone was throwing pots and pans. After a few moments of silence we heard the sound of ripping canvas, more shouting, and more banging.

Hugo put his head out to see what on earth was going on. But he quickly ducked back inside and zipped up the front of the tent. He looked a bit pale. “There’s a lion out there,” he said. “It’s between us and the Land Rover.”

In the bush you always park your car close to your tent so that you can leap into it if there is an emergency. If the lion was between the tent and the car, we knew it was very close indeed.

“It must have ripped open the kitchen tent,” said Hugo.

“Or Anyango’s, or Thomas’,” I said. Thomas, who helped with odd jobs around the camp, had a little tent next to Anyango’s. Both were near the kitchen tent.

Suppose the lion ripped open our tent. We decided to light the small gas stove. If a lion tried to enter we would light newspapers and wave them in its face.

A few moments later we heard racing footsteps. The car door opened and slammed shut. Almost at once there were more running footsteps and again the car door opened and slammed shut. Obviously Anyango and Thomas had reached safety.

Hugo cautiously zipped open the tent. There was no sign of a lion. Hugo scrambled into the car. He inched it forward, and I got in, too. Anyango and Thomas told us there were three lions. We switched on the headlights and looked for them. Soon we saw them—young males with their manes just beginning to sprout. We began to try herding them away from our camp. At first they didn’t want to go. They were curious and a bit playful. But eventually they wandered off into the night. We drove back and—oh, dear! —the first thing we saw was the flickering of flames. We had left the front flap of our tent loose, and the wind had blown it against the stove.

Luckily we had a fire extinguisher in the car and soon put the fire out. Then we heard the story from Anyango and Thomas.

Anyango was just going to serve our supper. Suddenly he looked up and saw a lion’s head framed in the entrance of the tent. Yelling loudly, he hurled saucepans and frying pans at it. The head vanished. Anyango called a warning to Thomas, who was resting in his little tent. Quickly Thomas closed the flap. But to his horror, a moment later the whole tent shook, and a great gash appeared in the side of it. A lion’s head peered in through the opening. Thomas, like Anyango, pelted the intruder with everything he could see.

Fortunately, instead of getting angry, the lions wandered away. Peering cautiously into the night, Anyango, with his sharp African eyes, saw the third lion—the one who had visited Hugo and me—following his two companions behind the tents. That was when he and Thomas decided to run for safety. It was silly of them, because lions, like cats, love to chase running, fast-moving things. But they were lucky. They made it.

Obviously we could not sleep in our torn and burned tents that night. We ate our supper—which was still hot. Then we packed up a few essentials and drove to a little log cabin nearby. We had stayed there before. The young couple who had been living in it had just left, so we knew it was empty. Imagine how we felt when, as we drove toward it, we saw a very large black-maned lion on the veranda! And behind the cabin was his lioness, feasting on a freshly caught antelope!

Eventually the male left. We managed to get into the cabin without disturbing the lioness, and Anyango and Thomas bolted themselves into the little wooden kitchen hut for the night.

No wonder they thought that my son, born so soon afterward, should have been called Simba! As it was, he became known as Grub to his family and closest friends. There was no very good reason for this. His real name is Hugo Eric Louis.

When Grub was a tiny baby, Hugo and I were studying hyenas in Ngorongoro Crater. You probably think of hyenas as skulking, cowardly scavengers, waiting for scraps left by the lions. Don’t believe it! They are great hunters, going after wildebeestes and zebras, as well as smaller creatures. Quite often, especially in the crater, they actually lose their kills to scavenging lions. They try to defend their prey fiercely at such times. They do also feed on the remains of lions’ kills, but they do not always wait patiently until the lion has finished. If there are enough of them, they try to drive the lions away.

















Grub taking a bath in the forest. Photograph © Hugo van Lawick.



Hyenas are actually very interesting creatures. Like chimps, they wander around in little groups of friendly individuals. Like chimps, they have very distinct personalities and fascinating behavior. Like chimps, they are territorial and may kill hyenas from neighboring clans. The biggest difference in their social behavior is that females are dominant in hyena society, whereas males are dominant in the world of the chimp.

I loved studying those Ngorongoro hyenas. At night, when there was a moon, I would drive our VW camper to a hyena den where there were one or two tiny black cubs. Grub was usually asleep in the back of the car. As dusk settled, other, older cubs would begin to appear. They were coming to play with the little ones, the ones who were not old enough to go visiting.

What wonderful games went on around those dens in the moonlight! Sometimes the cubs played tag with an ostrich feather or an old bone. They had mock battles and tumbled over and over, wrestling and biting.

After hunting, late at night, the hyena mothers would visit the dens. They would suckle their cubs and sometimes bring back a large bone or a whole head from a kill. And there were times when even the biggest and fattest of the mothers, Mrs. Stink and Baggage, for example, would start to play, chasing each other and the cubs around in circles, their fat bellies almost touching the ground.

During the months I spent in the crater and afterward, on the Serengeti when Hugo was filming the wild dogs, there were other people at Gombe watching the chimpanzees. I used to talk to them on a two-way radio almost every day. And quite often, we went to Gombe to spend some time there ourselves.


















Grub in Ngorongoro Crater. Photograph © Hugo van Lawick.



But when Grub was small, we had to be very careful. Chimpanzees, as I have said, are hunters. I knew that many years before I had arrived at Gombe, chimpanzees had taken two African babies for food. Of course, that seems shocking to us. But from the chimps’ point of view it is no different to take a human baby than a baboon baby. Some African tribes in West and Central Africa love to eat chimpanzees.

Anyway, I took good care to always guard my baby very safely when he came to Gombe. Before he could walk, we built a “cage” for him. It was a safe place for his cot, inside the little one-roomed house where Hugo and I lived.

Then Grub began to walk. We could no longer keep him in his safe cage. So we built another house, down on the beach where the chimpanzees only sometimes roamed. We constructed a big, caged-in veranda where Grub could play safely.




















Grub helping to put up the tent in Ngorongoro Crater. Photograph © Hugo van Lawick.



When Grub was outside, he was always with someone—often with me. When he was small, I more or less stopped working with the chimps. I went up to the chimp camp most days, but just to talk to the students, and to see the chimps—Flo and her family and all my other friends. Then I went down to my office in the house on the beach and got on with all the work of running a research center: writing reports, writing articles for scientific books, requesting money so that the work could go on. I had about twelve students and assistants then. It was a lot of work.

Then, after lunch, I spent the rest of the day with Grub. We went for walks and looked at books and talked about things. Because Hugo and I didn’t want to send him away to school, we found a tutor for him when he was older. He had regular lessons every morning.

When Grub was seven years old, Hugo and I separated and divorced. Hugo’s work, photographing and filming, took him all over the place. And I felt that it was important for me to spend most of my time at Gombe. We stayed good friends, but it was sad, especially for Grub. If I could live that pary of my life over again, I would try very hard to work things out differently.

Hugo and I both married again. I married an Englishman, Derek Bryceson. He was the director of Tanzania National Park. Derek had been a fighter pilot in World War II, where he flew Hurricanes. He was shot down in the Middle East when he was just nineteen. After that he was almost completely paralyzed from the waist down. He got about, but with great difficulty, by using a stick—and willpower.























Grub and the author at Olduvai Gorge. Photograph © Hugo van Lawick.



To visit Gombe, Derek used to fly from his home in Dar es Salaam in a little single-engine four-seater Cessna plane called Mike Whisky. He sometimes flew her himself, but only when she was airborne. He couldn’t land or take off, because you have to use your legs and feet to keep the plane straight and to brake. Sometimes Grub and I flew with him to visit one of Tanzania’s other national parks.

One day we flew from Dar es Salaam to a lovely wild park called Ruaha. Derek and the pilot were sitting together in the front. Suddenly they noticed something scary. A little plume of smoke was creeping out from the instrument panel! We were flying over rugged country, and there was nowhere to land until we got to the bush airstrip at Ruaha. That was forty-five minutes away.

Derek told us we should try not to worry. We talked of other things. The little wisp of smoke didn’t go away. But it didn’t get any worse, either.

At last we got to Ruaha. The pilot came down to land, but there was a herd of zebras on the strip. So he pulled up and circled around.

To this day I can’t imagine why, after all that time, the pilot suddenly lost his nerve. Instead of circling right around and coming down on the airstrip, he tried to land among the trees on the far side of the Ruaha River. Wham! We hit the ground. One wing smashed into a tree. We slewed around. The plane crashed on through the bushes and banged into another tree. Finally we came to a stop. The pilot opened his door, yelled, “Get out quickly— she’s going up in flames,” and was gone! I told Grub to follow him. But the door on Derek’s side would open only about two inches. Then it hit the ground. The wheel on that side had buckled, so the plane sat at a crazy angle, the opposite wing high in the air.

For a few moments I panicked. How on earth could Derek, with his almost paralyzed legs, get out of the plane before it caught fire? Then he told me to relax, that there would be no fire. And slowly he managed to pull himself up and out through the other door.

After getting out of the plane, we had to cross the Ruaha River to get to park headquarters on the other side. We could have waited for a car to come around via the hand-operated ferry, but that was some way upriver and would have taken about thirty minutes. So we decided that despite the big crocodiles in the river, we would risk it and wade across. After all, if God had allowed us to survive the crash, surely He would not allow crocodiles to eat us! And He didn’t!

We arrived at the rest house tired and wet, but thankful to be alive and unharmed. By then my legs had begun to shake from delayed shock! We were all glad to sit down and have a nice hot, strong cup of tea.

Those trips to Tanzania’s beautiful parks were wonderful, and I learned more and more about many different animals. But I still spent almost all my time at Gombe with the chimps and with the students who came from the United States and Europe to help with the observations or to collect information for their masters or doctoral degrees.

In the middle of one night in 1975, some African rebels from Zaire crossed the lake in a motorboat and captured four of the students who were working at Gombe. They tied them up and took them back over the lake.

It was very frightening. We didn’t know where they had gone for quite a long time. We didn’t even know if they were alive. All the rest of us had to leave Gombe and go to Dar es Salaam, the capital of Tanzania. Grub and I joined Derek in his house on the shore of the Indian Ocean, and many of the students squeezed into our little guest house. It was terrible, waiting to know what would happen. But eventually, after secret negotiations, a big ransom was paid to the rebels, and the students were all released.

During those weeks of waiting, Derek and I twice visited Gombe to try to encourage the Tanzanian field staff who were carrying on with observing the chimpanzees. They did a wonderful job, but they needed a lot of guidance and help at first. But for Derek, the chimpanzee research might have ended then.

















Grub and Derek sitting on the veranda of the house in Dar es Salaam.



Derek was a nationalized Tanzanian. He knew Swahili as well as he knew English. And he was liked and respected by almost all Tanzanians, including the Kigoma officials and my own field staff. He helped me to build up a new research center, where almost all the observations were made by the Tanzanian field staff.

The following year Grub was nine. He went to live with my mother in England and went to school close by. He slept in the room where I had slept from the time I was about twelve. Grub and I were together every holiday, except for the time he spent with his father.







CHAPTER 8






Over the years since I first arrived at Gombe, in 1960, I have known many chimps. Some of them I have known only slightly—because they were shy and I didn’t see them often, or because they died soon after I first met them. Others I got to know well. Because chimpanzees are so like humans, and because each has his or her own unique character, there have been some individuals that I have not liked very much, some that were just okay, and some that I have liked very much indeed.

I really loved old Flo. And because she was one of the first to come to camp, and came so often, I learned a great deal about chimpanzee behavior from her and her family. In 1964, when Flint was born, Flo was the top-ranking female. Of course, the adult males were dominant over her, but she could boss all the other females and even many of the adolescent males. She would always charge fearlessly to Flint’s defense if he needed her help. Moreover, the rest of her family—especially Fifi, but also Figan and even adult Faben—helped to protect little Flint. He became very self-assured. He would threaten chimps older and stronger than he was, because he knew that if they dared to retaliate, his mother, his sister, or one of his brothers would rush to help him. By the time he was four years old, Flint could best be described as a “spoiled brat.”
















Flo feeding on termites. Photograph by Hugo van Lawick, © National Geographic Society.



Then Flo began to wean him. When he wanted to suckle, she pushed him away. When he jumped on her back during travel, she shrugged him off. Flint, like many youngsters, become very upset. He threw violent tantrums, hurling himself about and screaming until he almost choked. He even hit and bit his mother. Indeed, he was so violent that Flo had not managed to wean him properly by the time her next baby was born.

Most youngsters begin to make their own night nests when their baby brothers or sisters are born. But Flint insisted on pushing in with Flo and his new sister, Flame. When Flo tried to stop him, he cried until she gave in. And he insisted on riding her back, even though the new baby was clinging on below. Because part of Flo’s attention now went to the new baby, Flint became upset and behaved like a jealous human child. He even tried to push in and suckle along with Flame. When Flo stopped him—she did not have enough milk for two youngsters—he became very depressed. When Flo groomed the baby, Flint often pulled her hand away, wanting her to groom him instead. But he was never mean to his infant sister. Indeed, he often played with her and carried her around.

Little Flame disappeared when she was six months old. It happened when Flo got really sick. We found her lying on the ground, too weak to climb. We never found out what happened to Flame—probably she died of Flo’s illness. Flo, to our joy, recovered. And Flint, now that he had his mother’s

undivided attention, quickly regained his former high spirits. But he went on sleeping with Flo, riding her back, and constantly pestering her for grooming.


















Flo, Fifi, Flint, and the author. Photograph by Hugo van Lavick, © National Geographic Society.



Most eight-year-old males begin to spend time away from their mothers, traveling with the big males, learning the sorts of things they need to know when they are grown up. But Flint was still pathetically dependent on Flo. By this time she was looking very ancient—she must have been close to fifty years old. Her teeth were worn to the gum, her once black hair was brown and sparse, and she was shrunken and frail-looking like a little old lady. She simply collapsed when Flint tried to ride on her back, so he had to walk. But he still slept with her at night. They were mostly on their own together because Flo was too weak to keep up with the other chimps. Her old age would have been very lonely but for Flint.

Flo died in 1972. It was a very sad day for me—I had known her for so long, and she had taught me so much. She died crossing the clear, fast-flowing Kakombe Stream. She looked so peaceful—it was as if her heart had suddenly just stopped beating. I looked down at my old friend, and I knew Gombe would never be quite the same without her.

For Flint, Flo’s death was a blow from which he never recovered. It was as though, without his mother, he no longer had the will to live. Hunched and miserable, he sat on the bank of the stream near his mother’s body. From time to time he approached her, searching, it seemed, for a sign of life. He

stared at her, then pulled at her hand as though begging her to groom him, to comfort him, as she had done throughout his life.

But Flo’s body lay motionless—cold and dead. Finally Flint moved away. His depression worsened. He ate almost nothing, he stayed mostly alone, and in this state of grief he fell sick. This often happens when we are very miserable, because then the body’s defenses against disease are weakened.

We tried to help Flint in his sickness and misery. We took him food and stayed with him so that he would not feel utterly alone. But nothing did any good, and about three weeks after Flo died, Flint died, too. It seems that because Flo had been too old to force the spoiled Flint to become independent, he simply couldn’t face life without her.

Of course, Fifi had tried to help her young brother. But by then she had an infant of her own. When Flint refused to move away from the place where Flo had died, Fifi had to leave him so she could feed herself and her one-year-old son, Freud.

There are good chimpanzee mothers and bad chimpanzee mothers. Fifi was a wonderful mother, just as Flo had been a wonderful mother until she got too old to cope. Fifi was affectionate and protective, tolerant and playful. Some of her behavior was inherited, or instinctive. Some she had learned from watching Flo caring for Flint and Flame. Some she had acquired by practice, from the days when she had been allowed to care for her young siblings. And, of course, she had watched other mothers and often carried and groomed their infants, too.

When Freud was five years old, his brother Frodo was born. Freud was absolutely fascinated and played with the baby and carried him, just as Fifi had done with her little brother twelve years before. Frodo watched everything that big brother Freud did and often tried to do the same himself. Because he was always trying to copy Freud, Frodo became very precocious.

















Fifi plays with Frodo.



When Frodo was five years old, Fifi gave birth to a daughter, Fanni. Frodo was fascinated by Fanni just as Freud had been with him. But Frodo was often very rough with his little sister—the first sign of the bully that he would become when he was older. Luckily, Fanni was a tough little thing and never seemed to mind when Frodo dragged her or dropped her from a tree. She was just four and a half years old when sister Flossi came along— and, of course, she loved to play with and help care for the baby. Freud by then was a fully adult male, but he still spent time with his family and often played gently with both of his small sisters.


















Fifi and Fanni.



Young brothers or sisters can sometimes be very useful. Once, when I was with Fifi, we heard a group of males calling, some distance away. Fifi didn’t want to join them, but Freud did. And even though he was quite grown up, he didn’t want to go without Mom. Not that day. So what did he do? He went over to infant Flossi, gathered her up, and when she clung to his belly, set off toward the males. Then Fifi had to follow! As I smiled at his ploy, I remembered eighteen-year-old Faben doing exactly the same when Flint was a baby—because Flo didn’t want to stop feasting on termites and Faben was impatient to be gone. And, just like Freud, he had wanted Mom along!

When I am at Gombe I often follow Fifi and her family. If I know where they slept the night before, I get up very early, in the dark, and arrive at their nests just as it gets light. Then I follow them through the forest, sometimes for a whole day. But it is not easy to follow chimps for a long time. The undergrowth is very thick, and though there are trails where you can walk upright, the chimps seldom use them for long. They go along their own pathways, moving easily through thick tangles of thorny undergrowth. To follow, you must crawl after them on all fours, or even wriggle along on your tummy. Thorns catch at your clothes, your hair, and your skin. Vines curl around the buckles of your shoes. As you struggle to pull free, you see the black shapes ahead vanishing, and you almost cry with frustration. But if you are lucky, you find the chimps again when you emerge from your battle with the vegetation. There they are, feeding peacefully in a tree or

resting quietly on the ground, grooming one another. Then, as you watch, you know it was all worthwhile.
















Two members of the Tanzanian field staff, Hamisi Mkono and Yahaya Alamasi. Photograph by Bill Wallauer, © The Jane Goodall Institute.



The Tanzanian field staff are wonderful at following the chimps, even through the most difficult places and up the steepest and most treacherous slopes. They can’t follow when the chimps cross a narrow, steep-sided valley by swinging from tree to tree, or when they climb the slender vines that often hang down a sheer cliff face. But even then, the men can often predict where the chimps are going and so catch up with them later. Some of these skilled observers—such as Hilali Matama, Yahaya Alamasi, Hamisi Mkono, and Eslom Mpongo—have been with us for years, since the late sixties. What stories they have to tell about their adventures with the chimpanzees.

Hilali loves to follow the males, particularly when they go on their exciting border patrols or when they are hunting. And he especially loves talking about Figan, Fifi’s elder brother. Figan, who died in 1981, was one of the most intelligent of chimpanzees. And, like Mike, Figan got to be the top-ranking male—the alpha male—by using his brains. You remember how Mike became top male by using empty tin cans? Well, when Mike was about thirty-five years old, he was overthrown by a very big and aggressive male called Humphrey. But Humphrey, despite his size, didn’t last for long —only for eighteen months. Then Figan took over.

Like Mike, Figan was small. How did he defeat Humphrey? He deliberately made use of the friendly relationship that he had with brother Faben. Faben

had become completely paralyzed in one arm during the terrible polio epidemic of 1966. But even with a useless arm he made a good ally. He had learned to perform magnificent upright charging displays. Figan knew if he was attacked by one of the higher ranking males, Faben almost always would come rushing up to help him. And so Figan confronted the much bigger Humphrey only when Faben was in the same group. Then he charged toward Humphrey, threatening him again and again, and Faben usually joined in. It was two against one. Even though the brothers didn’t actually attack him, Humphrey became more and more tense when they were around. And Figan became more and more self-confident.

Then, one evening, came the showdown. Figan, Faben, and Humphrey were all together in a very big group. As the sun sank, they began to make their nests, one after the other. But not Figan. When most of the others had settled down for the night, he suddenly began to leap about wildly through the branches. There were loud screams as chimps left their nests and rushed out of his way.




















Faben walking upright after being stricken by polio. Photograph © Hugo van Lawick.



All at once, as though made brave by his display of power, Figan leapt down onto Humphrey, who was lying in his nest, and attacked him. Humphrey, screaming loudly, pulled away from Figan and dropped to the ground. Figan followed, attacked him again, and then climbed back into the tree. Presently Humphrey climbed quietly back, too, and made a second nest.

But Figan was not through. When everything was peaceful again, he once more charged through the trees and attacked Humphrey. Again they dropped, fighting, to the ground. This time Figan chased his rival for some distance before leaving him. Poor Humphrey! He sat screaming until it was almost dark and Figan had gone to bed. Then, cautiously, he climbed back into the tree and made his third nest. Never again, for the rest of his life, did he try to dominate Figan. And so Flo’s son, when he was about twenty-three years old, became top-ranking male. He was alpha until he died (of unknown causes) ten years later.

And guess what? In 1994, Fifi’s eldest son, Freud, became the top male. Of course, he didn’t take over from Figan. A male called Goblin was the next alpha, and he, like Figan, reigned over the community for ten years. Then

young Wilkie took over for a while, but only for a couple of years. His place was taken by Freud, who, like his uncle Figan before him, was twenty-three years old.


















Fifi, Faustino, Flossi, and Frodo in a 1989 grooming session. © The Jane Goodall Institute.



Twenty years after her death, Flo’s descendants form the most powerful family at Gombe and by far the largest. Fifi, who is now the top-ranking female, has two more sons, Faustino and baby Ferdinand. Daughter Fanni has a three-year-old son of her own. And Flossi will give birth by the end of 1996. Freud is absolutely confident in his top-ranked position. And his brother, Frodo, is the largest male we have ever known at Gombe, weighing 120 pounds. Flo would be proud of them.







CHAPTER 9






Because the study at Gombe has lasted for so many years, we have learned many fascinating things about chimpanzee behavior. Now I want to share what I’ve discovered with as many people as possible. It is necessary to write scientific papers for the benefit of other scientists doing field research in different parts of Africa or working with captive chimps. But it is just as important to write books for the general public, for people of all ages and in all countries. I have been very lucky in my life. I have known the excitement of watching wild, free animals. Most people can’t have such experiences. They may not even want to. But they love to hear about my life in the wild, and in the telling, I try to explain just how amazing chimpanzees—and many other animals—really are.

These days I spend most of my time traveling around the world—giving lectures, trying to raise money, and talking to people like you about the chimpanzees and what we are trying to do to help them and other animals.























Grub and the author. © Neil Jacobs.



Derek got cancer. He died in 1980, and it was a very sad time for me. Grub decided to make his life in Tanzania. He lives with his two children, Merlin and Angel, and their mother, Maria, in the little guest house next to my house on the shore of the Indian Ocean. His passion is sports fishing, and he is one of the best fishermen in Dar es Salaam. Spoof and Mona Lisa are the two dogs who live with us there.

I do my writing either at Dar es Salaam or in England, in the dear old Birches where I grew up. That way I can be with my mother and her sister Ollie. They don’t like me to talk about their age—but wow! When you get to about ninety and are still active and full of fun, I think that’s something to be really proud of.

I never spend more than three weeks anywhere. There is so much to do. The good thing is that when I get too old and can’t travel much, it won’t matter —because you’ll be there helping, too, won’t you?

When I was young, as I have said, I knew that, somehow, I would go to Africa and live with animals. And I wanted to write books about them. I

don’t think I spent too much time wondering exactly how I would do it. I just felt sure the right opportunity would somehow come. I didn’t feel frustrated because I could not immediately get to the wild places. Partly this was because I knew I could never go on a really long trip while Rusty was still alive. It would have seemed like a betrayal. And while I waited I went on learning. I learned a great deal from Rusty. I read books about animals, and I watched the birds and insects in the garden. When I worked in London I used to visit the Natural History Museum at least once a week, and I made notes about the things I saw there. I went camping with my sister Judy, or Sally. I met a lot of different people. And I spent as many weekends with my family—and Rusty—as I could. We had a lot of fun in my family. We laughed and teased one another. We still do.

Many young people today don’t know exactly what they want to do with their lives, even when they have finished college. If you do, you are lucky. I get a lot of letters from kids—any age from about five years old and up— telling me they want to work with animals when they grow up. Some of them want to know how they can prepare themselves. Let’s suppose that you are one of them. There are many things you can do—things that will teach you to observe carefully and begin to understand more and more about the true nature of nonhuman animals. You can watch animals and see what they do. You can write notes about what you see. And you can ask those why, how, and what for questions that we talked about in Chapter 1. Some answers you will find by watching. Some you can find only by looking them up in a book or asking a knowledgeable teacher. Whatever you do, don’t do anything that hurts or frightens the animal you are interested in.


















Searching for chimpanzees. Photograph by Hugo van Lawick, © National Geographic Society.



You can go on nature walks, as I used to. If you live in a city, perhaps you can go to a park or garden where you can watch some kind of animal. Even in inner-city areas you will find sparrows and pigeons. You can collect a caterpillar and keep it in a jar until it turns into a chrysalis. But you must find out what it eats, and you must remember to keep it supplied with fresh food. Put the stem of a leaf spray in water, in a narrow-necked container, such as a bottle, so the caterpillar can’t fall in and drown. This way the food will stay fresh longer. It will need water, too—just a few drops sprinkled on the leaves will do. You will see how it changes its skin as it eats more and gets fatter. I once forgot to feed one of my caterpillars. When I found it all dried up and dead, I felt so guilty. I hated myself.

When the caterpillar makes itself a hard case and becomes a chrysalis, you should put this where you can see it every day. It’s so easy to forget, when you don’t have to look after it anymore. But it is wonderful to see the butterfly or moth emerging and watch its crumpled wings become flat and strong. Then the beautiful creature that you have raised can fly out into the sunlight (or into the night, if it is a moth). Of course, you should release it somewhere near where you found it so that it can find a mate and lay eggs (if she’s a female) on the right kind of plant.

It is very exciting to watch a pair of birds as they go about making a nest. Don’t get too close, though, or they will leave the site, especially during the building and the brooding. But watching and making notes on the whole of the rearing will give you a real feeling of accomplishment. I used to make drawings, too. Once I was really lucky. A robin—the little British bird with a red breast, not the big American robin—came to my windowsill one winter while I was sick in bed. I put crumbs out every day. We fixed up a bird table, a board sticking out from the sill. That robin got so tame he would come and take crumbs from my bed, because I left the window open, even when it was very cold. In the spring (long after I was well again), he brought his mate, and they made a nest in my bedroom—in the bookcase right near my Doctor Dolittle books! That was truly fabulous.

Do you have a dog? Suppose he wants to go outside. How does he ask? Does he bark or whine at the door while looking at you? That’s easy to understand. But dogs can ask in other ways. Perhaps he or she comes up to you (or to another member of your family) and lays his head on your knee. Or he looks at you, gives a tiny whine, and wags his tail. Or he starts to pant, getting louder and louder. Or he becomes restless and walks about a lot. If he gives up in despair because none of the dumb humans seem to understand or care, he may lie down. But then, when you do get up, he will probably become very excited and start bounding about.

I know a black poodle who will fetch his mistress’s outdoor shoes and bring them to her, one by one, when he wants to go out. A lot of dogs will bring you their leashes. Konrad Lorenz describes another method. His dog needed to go out, very urgently, in the middle of the night. She couldn’t wake Lorenz by whining or scratching the door—her usual way of asking. So she leapt up onto his bed (which she was strictly not allowed to do) and actually dug him out of the blankets and rolled him onto the floor!

If you don’t have a dog, probably one of your friends does. You can watch the dog together. See how long a list you can make of the different ways it “talks” to its human companions and to other dogs. You can do just the same with cats.

Doctor Dolittle’s parrot, Polynesia, tells us that in order to learn animal language we must have “powers of observation.” We must be able to notice

“small things about birds and animals—the way they walk and move their heads and flip their wings, the way they sniff the air and twitch their whiskers and wiggle their tails.”

Of course, you don’t have to become an ethologist to study or work with animals. There are lots of other “ologists” to choose from! You could become a zoologist, a biologist, an anthropologist, or an ecologist. And there are even more. You can look up what they all mean in a dictionary. Or perhaps you want to become a veterinarian, work in a kennel, or work with horses.

Just remember—if you are really and truly determined to work with animals, somehow, either now or later, you will find a way to do it. But you have to want it desperately, work hard, take advantage of an opportunity— and never give up.

Perhaps, though, you don’t want to study animals or work with them. You want to be an engineer, a computer programmer, a secretary, a doctor, a lawyer, a caterer, a gardener, a construction worker, or whatever. But still you like animals. You would like to know more about them or to help them. Or you love wild places or city parks and would like to make sure they stay that way and do not become polluted or get dug up for roads, houses, or shops.

It is very important to save places where wild, free animals live. Animals have just as much right to go on living their lives as we do. Also, if we destroy too much of the natural world, we shall be depriving those who live after us of much beauty.

Moreover, it may actually be disastrous for us to destroy some kinds of living things. We know that many important drugs used to cure human diseases come from plants or even from insects. When we destroy a wild area, we may be destroying a whole species of plant or animal that is not found anywhere else. Without knowing it, we may be destroying the cure for cancer or AIDS or some other terrible disease.

In a forest, or wood—any kind of natural area—all the different kinds of plants and animals make up a whole, wonderful, complex pattern. If we

mess about with that pattern, all kinds of things can go wrong. For example, when the rabbits all over England died of the introduced rabbit disease, myxomatosis, the foxes didn’t have much left to eat, so they began killing the farmers’ chickens. The farmers then waged war against the foxes. They found that the rats and mice multiplied because there were no longer any foxes left to hunt them. The rats and mice destroyed the farmers’ grain in the fields and in their stores. The farmers ended up losing as much, or more, of their crop to rodents as they had lost to the rabbits.

Consider the farmer who sprays his fields with insecticide to kill the bugs that are damaging his crops. He kills thousands of harmless insects as well, including some that actually do good, such as bees that pollinate the flowers and give us honey. Creatures that feed on insects, especially birds, also get sick and die. In the end, because the poisonous chemicals get widely distributed, humans may become sick, too.

Perhaps you would like to help animals have better lives. First you can find out some of the problems. There are so many ways in which animals are mistreated, many that people don’t even know about. Or, if they do, they just think of it as something they can’t do anything about. That’s almost never true.

Think, for example, of the way most farm animals are treated today. We call it “factory farming” or “intensive farming.” Hens, in most parts of the Western world, must live their lives squashed three (or more) together in very tiny cages. Because they peck each other, their beaks are cut off. It hurts. Pigs, who are as intelligent as most dogs, are crowded together in the same way, with no opportunity for rooting about in the ground. It’s especially cruel to pen up young pigs, for they are very playful and love to run and chase each other.

It was when I learned about factory farming that I stopped eating meat. But there are still some farmers who treat their animals decently, in the “old-fashioned” way. Their products tend to be a bit more expensive (as are foods that are grown organically, without using chemical pesticides and fertilizers). But as more and more people buy them, they will eventually get much cheaper. Free-range farming, as it is called, will make life much better for millions of animals.

Thousands of animals are used every year for testing things such as detergents, cosmetics, and, in fact, almost every new product that comes on the market. Rabbits and guinea pigs, even dogs, cats, and monkeys are used for this testing, as well as rats and mice. Sometimes the testing can cause the animal a lot of pain. Many people are fighting to change all this. Some scientists are working very hard to find out ways of testing substances without using any animals at all. You can help by buying products that have not been tested on animals.

Of course, many animals are used in medical research as well. And not only does this mostly cause a lot of pain, but the animals are so often kept in tiny cramped cages. Unfortunately, a great amount of the research is of little or no use to humans. All that suffering for nothing.

Nor should we forget the cruelty to animals who are used just so that we can satisfy our human desire for knowledge. Some scientists—rather than sit and watch animals and learn by patiently waiting—prefer to learn by killing their subjects to see what is going on inside at various stages of their development or various stages of the scientists’ experiments. Hundreds of songbirds have been surgically deafened in order to find out if their songs are learned or instinctive. Wild monkey infants were blinded to see how they coped in the wild. (Most of them died.) I watched a TV show where the scientist proudly showed how he could kill little mice by making a certain kind of sudden loud noise. Psychologists are still teaching animals to perform various tasks by punishing them with electric shocks every time they make a mistake. And so on. Think of all the animals used in teaching science—in high school, vet school, and medical school. Thousands of them are killed each year. The fact that some of the best and most respected schools no longer use animals shows that it is usually not even necessary.

Why should we bother about the way animals are treated? Does it matter? After all, there are a lot of humans who are treated very badly. Shouldn’t we try to help them first? Of course, we must try to help suffering human beings. But suppose I ask you why? Why does it matter if fellow human beings suffer? They belong to the same species as you and me, so that we know that they have feelings like our own. We know that they can feel pain, as we do. We know that they can feel sadness, fear, despair, loneliness,

boredom. Well, so can chimpanzees. And so can dogs and cats and pigs and oh! so many others. Don’t you think so? If you agree, then you know why we should care about the suffering of nonhuman beings.

Cruelty is a terrible thing. I believe it is the worst human sin. When you are cruel you cause someone to suffer needlessly. A doctor trying desperately to save someone’s life on a battlefield may have to cut off an arm or a leg without anesthetics. This will cause a lot of pain, but it is not a deliberately cruel act. But if the doctor did the same procedure without anesthetics in a modern hospital, it would be very cruel indeed. If an intelligent creature that had no human feelings suddenly arrived from another planet it would not understand anything about pain and suffering. It might do things to us that caused us intense pain. But we could not say it was being deliberately cruel.

We are probably a long, long way from a world without cruelty. But I think we can all help, at least a little bit, to make it less cruel. We can all try to put right the things closest to home. If your neighbors are going out every evening and leaving their small son on his own and crying, you should certainly report it to some responsible adult. And what if your neighbors are mistreating their dog? Should you bother about that? I believe that you should. If the dog is being beaten, you can tell the local ASPCA. If the dog is left shut up for hours, you could offer, with your parents’ permission, to take it for walks.

It is really important for animals that we speak our minds when we see something wrong. That is not always easy. When I was a child I once saw four boys, much bigger than I was, pulling the legs off crabs. I was very upset. I asked them why they did it, and they said, “None of your business.” I told them it was cruel. They laughed.

And I went away. Now, forty years later, I am still ashamed of myself. Why didn’t I try to stop them from tormenting those crabs?

My son did better. Once, when he was five years old, he was at a nursery school in California (at a time when I used to teach, one quarter a year, at Stanford University). One day he saw a seven-year-old boy hosing a terrified rabbit in its cage and laughing. Grub went up and tried to pull the

hose away. The boy wouldn’t let go, so Grub started a fight. And though he was much smaller, he managed to win.

The teacher was very angry with Grub for fighting and punished him. Of course, we shouldn’t try to get our way through aggression. But she didn’t punish the other boy for being cruel. He should have been punished, too— don’t you think so?

There is a true story that I want to tell you now. It’s about a chimpanzee called Old Man. He was bought by a zoo in North America when he was an adolescent. We don’t know his history. Perhaps he was once in a lab or a circus. But he hated people. He was put to live on an island with three grown-up females. He got on fine with them. And one of the females had a baby. Old Man was the father.

Just about that time, a young man called Marc Cusano got a job looking after the chimps. Everyone told him how dangerous they were. And, truly, adult chimps in captivity often are dangerous because so many of them have not been well treated. So Marc didn’t go onto the island with the chimps’ food. Instead he paddled a little boat out toward the island and threw the food onto the shore.

But Marc spent time watching the chimps, too. He saw how gentle Old Man was with the baby. He saw how, when they were excited at meal times, they would hug and kiss each other for joy. And he realized what wonderful beings they were. Then he decided that he wanted to have a better relationship with them himself. So he began to make friends. He took the boat closer and closer. And the day came when he actually handed Old Man a banana. “Jane,” he told me afterward, “now I know how you felt when David Greybeard first took a banana from you!” It was the beginning of a friendship. Soon the day came when he dared step off the boat. Old Man let Marc groom him. And they sometimes played together. The three females were more standoffish, but they didn’t seem to mind Marc coming onto their island.













The infant Flint reaching out to his human companion. Photograph by Hugo van Lawick, © National Geographic Society.



Then, one day, Marc slipped and fell. The infant was close by and was startled. She screamed in fright, and at once her mother, thinking Marc had hurt her child, leapt onto him and began to bite his neck. He felt the blood run down. Before he could get up, the other two females joined the attack. One bit his arm, one his leg. He felt his hand go numb. He thought that he had had it. He could never escape now.

Then Old Man rushed up. He seized hold of the females, one after the other, and pulled them off Marc. He hurled them away. Marc began to drag himself toward the boat. Old Man stayed close beside him, threatening the females every time they tried to attack again. At last Marc got off the island. Old Man had saved his life.

That story has taught me a lot. If a chimpanzee can reach out to help a human, then surely we humans can reach out and try to help the chimpanzees and all the other creatures we live with in the world today.

This is what I am trying to do. I hope you will help me.







CHAPTER 10






Chimpanzees are gradually disappearing in Africa. They used to be found in twenty-five countries. They have gone from four of those and very nearly vanished from five others. Only in the very central part of their range are they found today in quite large numbers. That is where the last of the great African rain forests still stand—Cameroon and Gabon, Zaire and the Congo. Even these forests are disappearing. Sometimes this is so that rich men can get richer by selling the timber, and sometimes because the people living there need wood for cooking or for building. Or they need the land to live on or for grazing their cattle and goats or for building their houses. And all the time there are more and more people needing more and more land.

Also, chimpanzees are being hunted. They are shot for food. Even in countries where chimp flesh is not eaten, mothers may be shot so that hunters can steal their babies and sell them—for pets, for zoos and circuses, or for medical research. No one knows exactly how many chimps are left in the wild. But it is not more than 250,000. Does that sound like a lot to you? Find out how many people live in a city like Dallas or Toronto or London or Paris. Find out how many live in small towns. And then think how the 250,000 chimps are not all together, but separated (by deforestation) into small populations often not numbering more than 150, as at Gombe. It’s scary, isn’t it? Because small populations like that probably can’t survive for very long, even if they are protected. They start inbreeding—that’s when individuals who are closely related to each other mate and have babies. When that happens, the group eventually gets weak and may get sick from all kinds of diseases. It takes only two or three bad epidemics of disease to strike, and suddenly the group is gone.

About ten years ago I began visiting different African countries where chimpanzees still live to see what was going on and to see if I could help. The more I travel around, the more I realize how bad, sometimes desperate, the situation is—not only for the chimpanzees and the other animals of the African forests, but also for the people who live there.















The destruction of an African forest.



When you cut down a tropical forest, the soil is rich and fertile for a while. Crops grow, and cattle and goats are well fed and produce lots of milk or meat or babies. But after a few years all the nutrients are gone from the soil. Then the crops don’t grow well and the animals get thin. Worst of all, without the protection of the trees, the earth gets washed away by heavy rain. Soon there may be just bare rock left, and nothing will grow. Rivers and lakes get clogged with the soil washed down by the rain, and the fish may die. In the end, there is a desert where it was once nice and green and beautiful. Then the people as well as the animals begin to starve.

So, why do local people cut down the trees? Are they stupid? If we know that clearing forests will make a desert, why don’t they? Actually, they do know. Farmers understand the land very well. In the old days, when there was plenty of land because there were not nearly so many people, they didn’t need to cut down many trees. After a while they could move somewhere else to live, and trees would grow again when they had gone.

Usually people can’t do that today. There is nowhere for them to go. There are just so many people. If they didn’t cut down trees, they could not grow crops or feed cattle. And so, because they are very poor and can’t buy their food, they don’t really have a choice, do they?

It’s not only the farmers who cut down trees. Politicians sell huge areas of the forests to timber companies because they need the money for their

countries. Often, sadly, the politicians are not honest. A lot of the money, instead of helping the poor people, is stolen by the politicians.

I hope the day will come when the wealthy developed countries stop buying timber from countries containing the tropical rain forests of the world. Surely we can use furniture made from other wood? Then if the African or Asian or South American governments could make more money from tourists going to visit their forests than they could from selling the timber, the future would be much brighter.

But what about the hunting? In many of the countries of West and Central Africa, the people love “bushmeat.” In the old days a hunter would shoot or trap animals just to feed his own family, perhaps his village. But now he kills as many as he can, cuts them up, dries or smokes the meat, and then sends it on a truck to the towns. It is not legal to hunt chimpanzees; they are endangered. But how does anyone know what the animal was when it has been cut into small pieces? Thousands of animals are killed for the bushmeat trade each year.

The only hope for the wild animal populations in these countries is that, because animals are disappearing fast, they are harder to find and kill. The hunters complain that they have to travel farther and farther into the forest to catch anything at all. And so, if programs for breeding domestic animals can be introduced, at least some of the remaining wildlife will have a chance.

If the bushmeat hunters get hold of a baby chimp, they try to sell it as a pet. I can never forget the first time I saw one of these pathetic infants for sale in the tourist market of a Central African town. He had a piece of cord tied tightly around his waist, and this was attached to the top of a tiny wire cage. He was curled up on his side, and when I went close, I saw that he was sweating in the heat. His eyes were dull and staring into space. It would not be long before he was dead.

I made the tiny panting sound that friendly chimpanzees use when they greet each other. To my amazement the little orphan sat up, looked at me, and reached out to touch my face.

What could I do? If I bought him, then the hunter would try to get more infants to sell. But after that gesture, that seemed to beg for help, how could I leave him?

I went to see the American ambassador. Together we called on the minister for the environment. There was a law which made it illegal to hunt and sell chimpanzees without a license. But nobody cared, so the law was never enforced. However, the minister agreed to help this chimp, and even came back with us, along with a policeman. They confiscated the infant. I cut the rope with a knife—he was free.


















The author and Little Jay. © Steve Matthews.



But he was very sick and frightened and sad. There were shotgun pellets under his skin. Luckily, I had just met a most wonderful woman, Graziella Cotman. She agreed to try to nurse Little Jay, as we called him, back to health. She was successful. More infant chimps were confiscated, and Graziella’s family of orphans grew.

Today, Graziella is caring for forty-eight orphans in the Congo Republic in Central Africa. One of the petroleum companies, Conoco, that was exploring for oil, agreed to build a big sanctuary for the chimps—a patch of forest with an electric fence around it. It is called the Tchimpounga Sanctuary, named for the nearby village. We can never set the chimps free. For one thing, they need their mothers to teach them how to live in the forest. For another, wild chimps would probably kill them—you remember how the Gombe chimps attack strangers. Also, because our orphans have no fear of people, they would probably wander into the villages where, because of their strength, they would be dangerous. But at least in the sanctuary they can climb trees and have good food and, most important, live without fear.













Chimpanzee orphans at the Tchimpounga sanctuary. © The Jane Goodall Institute.



Graziella and her team of four Congolese keepers do a great job. When new chimps are confiscated they need a great deal of attention. Often they need medicine. And milk. And, most important, they need lots of love. Once they have got over the worst of their fear and are reasonably healthy, they are introduced to some of the other youngsters.

There are three main groups. The biggest goes out each day into the sanctuary, and the chimps play in the forest. A smaller group of younger chimps goes out into a small forest patch near the sanctuary with one of the Congolese keepers. And then there is a little group of babies, still feeding from baby bottles. They go out, too, with another keeper, and learn how to climb small, safe trees.
















Chinoc and Ngolo—chimpanzee friends in the Congo. © Jennifer Crow.



There are some fruits and leaves that they can eat out in the forest, but we have to provide most of their food—three times a day. It is an amazing sight to see as many as thirty young chimpanzees all gathering around the Congolese staff for their morning mugs of milk or their evening balls of sticky rice. In between they get lots of fruit.

There is some beautiful wild country around our Tchimpounga Sanctuary, and the government has agreed that it can become a preserved area. There are some wild chimps there, but not many. We have talked with the chiefs of all the villages in the area, and they will help us. In return, we employ our staff from their villages, buy fruit and vegetables, and pay for wild fruits to be collected from the trees. We are also renovating their schoolhouse and setting up a little clinic. We hope that tourists will come, to see our sanctuary and drive around the preserve and bring more money into the district. That is the best way to try to help save the wild animals that remain.

All of the forty-eight orphans have their own personalities and sad little life histories. Of course, all are named. Some were bought as pets and handed over to us when they got too big and potentially dangerous to go on living in the house. This happens—always—when the chimp is between five and seven years old.

One chimp with a most interesting story is Rickie. She was bought by a Congolese man who loved her and had her with him in his house. When he had to go away for a quite long period, poor Rickie was shut out of the house. The rest of the family was not so fond of her.

Rickie was only about two years old. She desperately needed love and reassurance from a responsible caretaker. So she approached the only possible candidate—Henri, a medium-size shaggy dog. Henri was also shut outside.

Amazingly, Henri adopted Rickie. She slept curled up beside him, one hand clutching his fur. And when he went scrounging in the dustbins of Brazzaville, Rickie went along—riding on his back!

Eventually the owner came back, and we persuaded him to let Rickie join the Tchimpounga chimps before she got any older. (The older they are, the harder it is to introduce them to an existing group.) She got on fine, but I worried about poor Henri, left all alone. However, his owner is a very nice person, and when Graziella explained my concern, he agreed to get a companion for his dog—this time another dog.

We are also looking after chimpanzee orphans in Burundi, in Uganda, and, most recently, in Tanzania. And we are involved with a big new sanctuary in Kenya. Many of these orphans were actually captured in the huge Central African country of Zaire. That country has so many political and economic problems that it is almost impossible for the officials to enforce any of the wildlife laws and regulations.

The chimps in our sanctuaries are lucky. Some infant chimps are sold to animal dealers. They are the really evil people, making money out of the suffering of thousands of live animals. The conditions in which they are kept are often so bad that many of these animals die. It is illegal to export chimpanzees from most African countries, so the dealers smuggle them out in tiny boxes, often with misleading labels. Many chimps die on the journey.

What happens to the chimps that survive? Some are bought for zoos, particularly by wealthy Arabs who like to keep private collections of wild

animals. Some are bought to be trained for the circus. This almost always involves very cruel training. First, the chimps must be taught to obey, and usually this is done by beating them with metal bars. Then, because they have learned to fear their trainer, they can be made to perform stupid tricks dressed in unsuitable clothes, day after day, night after night. It is much the same when they are used in advertising.

Some chimps are sold as pets. When they are small they are like cute adorable babies. And they can do most things that a small human child can do. Some things they do a lot better—like climbing the furniture and swinging from the drapes! But, as I said, by the time the chimps are five to seven years old they can no longer be part of a human family. It’s just not safe.

So what happens to them? They think they are human. They don’t know how to get on with other chimps. Eventually they can learn, but it takes a long time and most zoos won’t take them. So for the most part they end up in medical research laboratories, which is what happens to a lot of ex-circus chimps as well.

Because chimp bodies are so like human bodies, and because chimps can get all our diseases, hundreds are being used in medical research labs by scientists who hope to find cures or vaccines for human illnesses. What is so awful is that these chimps are often treated very badly (as many other lab animals are) by people who either don’t care or who don’t understand that chimps suffer the way we do, as well as contract our diseases. The chimps are put into tiny cages, often by themselves, with nothing soft to sit on, nothing to play with, and no one to comfort and love them when they are hurt. If you do things like this to a human being, he or she goes crazy. So do the chimps.














Lab chimps stare out from behind the bars of a cage. Courtesy of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.



One day, perhaps quite soon, scientists may not need to use animals for testing drugs and for learning about human diseases. They are so clever at finding other ways to do their research. But until that happens, it is desperately urgent that we try to give those animals being used today much better places to live, much better care, much more respect, and much more love.

It is very hard for me to go into a lab where there are chimps. But I have to do that if I want to try to help: I need to see what is going on with my own eyes. So often things you hear secondhand are not quite true.

The first lab I visited was the worst. There were little chimps in tiny, tiny cages. The cages were inside steel boxes that looked like microwave ovens. This was to prevent microbes from one chimp infecting another—or from infecting a human. I couldn’t believe that people could treat chimps like that. I talked to the director and all his staff. I tried to make them understand why I felt so bad by showing them slides and movies of the chimpanzees’ life in the wild. And I talked about the conditions that I had seen in that lab during my lectures all around America.

Luckily, the director—who had never had anything to do with chimps before—listened. He realized that he was not treating the animals in his lab right. He managed to get more money, and he made the cages much, much bigger. He gave the little chimps toys to play with and climbing structures. Best of all, he began keeping them in pairs instead of by themselves. So,

you see, things are getting better, but too slowly, not fast enough. There is so much to do.







CHAPTER 11






Chimpanzees are so like us. Their blood and their response to disease are like ours. Their brains are more like ours than those of any other living creature. A lot of their behavior is like ours. They have a long childhood, during which they have much to learn. And they can learn by watching one another, then imitating. Most nonhuman animals can’t do that. The members of a chimp family are very close and help one another. Chimpanzees embrace and kiss when they greet and hold hands or grab on to each other when they are frightened, and one calms another by gently patting his back. They swagger and punch and kick when they are mad at each other. They can feel sad or happy, afraid, angry, or hopeless. One chimp may feel sorry for or love another. And because their brains are so complex, chimps can do things we used to think only humans could do— like solving problems and planning ahead what they are going to do. Captive chimps can even be taught as many as three hundred of the signs of American Sign Language (ASL) that deaf people use. They can communicate with each other that way, as well as with their trainer. Some captive chimps love to paint, and if they know ASL, they may actually sign what the painting is supposed to be. I have a lovely pale red-and-mauve design: “Ice cream!” the chimp artist had signed as she handed it to her human teacher. Another red-and-yellow work is labeled “Banana Flower.”

Chimpanzees can be aggressive and cruel. When they patrol the boundaries of their territory, they may try to kill stranger chimps from a different community. But they can be very kind and loving, too. One of my favorite stories is about little Mel and Spindle. Mel lost his mother when he was just three and a quarter years old. He had no elder brother or sister to care for him. He was alone in the world, and he wasn’t even very strong. We all expected he would die. But, to our amazement, twelve-year-old Spindle, an

adolescent male, adopted Mel. He waited for him during travel, he let Mel ride on his back and share his nest at night. He shared food if Mel begged, holding out his hand and whimpering. He even rushed to rescue his charge if Mel got too close to the big males when they were socially excited— when they sometimes hurl an infant out of their way. On a number of occasions that meant that Spindle himself got buffeted around.

Spindle saved Mel’s life. Yet he was not related to Mel’s mother—they had not even spent time together. So why did he adopt the infant? Mel’s mother died in an epidemic of what we think was pneumonia, and Spindle’s old mother died then, too. Spindle didn’t need a mother like Mel did, and he was spending most of his time with the adult males. But still, he often wandered calmly around with his old parent. Perhaps her death left an empty space in his life. And perhaps the close relationship he formed with little Mel helped to fill that space. I don’t suppose we shall ever know.

Just like the chimps, we human beings have two sides to our nature. We can be nasty and hateful, but we can also be kind and loving. We have a choice as to which of these sides wins out. Don’t you think so? If you feel really mad at someone, you don’t have to show it, do you? Certainly you don’t have to yell at or hit the person. You can, if you really want to, control your feelings of rage. Can’t you?

Try making notes about yourself, how you react to things. Do you always like what you do? Could you change? Do you want to? Watch how other people get on—or not—with each other. Observe just as I do with the chimps. You can talk about it afterward, compare notes. It’s fun!

Human beings can do all sorts of wonderful and noble things—people even give their lives to help others. But human beings can also do the most terrible and evil and cruel things. We can be really good, or we can be really wicked. Sadly, the newspapers and TV like to report all the bad things. We often get the feeling that humans are even worse than they are. Every day we learn about the terrible violence in our world—the fighting and the wars. The drugs and gang violence in the inner cities, the kidnapping and terrorism that is everywhere.

And, of course, it’s all true. But it would be nice to hear more about all the ordinary decent people, more about the nice things that happen all the time.

In addition to war and crime and cruelty, we have to worry about environmental problems—about pollution, the growing hole in the ozone layer, the greenhouse effect, and global warming. I talked about the problems of the human population explosion and deforestation and starvation in Africa. Of course, there are similar problems in very many parts of the world. Gradually, as more and more human babies are born and people live longer and longer, more and more of the wild places disappear, and more and more wild animals lose their homes and, usually, their lives.

It all seems a bit grim, doesn’t it? In fact, a lot of scientists believe that there is no hope for us. They tell us that we have destroyed and hurt so much that nature cannot recover. And there are other people who believe that there will always be violence and war, that we humans are selfish and greedy and can never change.

This is not the way I think. Luckily we have at last begun to understand that we really are in danger of destroying our environment and ourselves along with it. We are beginning to understand that the problems around the globe are linked. How? Well, an example would be: a big American timber company logs a huge forest in Africa. It sells the wood—tropical hard wood —to several different countries. Everyone who buys the furniture will have contributed to the destruction of the forest, and the destruction of the forest contributes to the process of global warming. So, you see, finally we know the kind of problems we have to solve, which is the first step on the road to finding solutions.

As I have said, understanding what chimpanzees are like has made me realize that we humans are not so different from other animals as we used to think. What makes us most different is that we are far more clever than even the cleverest chimp, and we have words. We have a spoken language. We can tell stories about what happened a week or a year or a decade ago. We can plan for the future, and we can discuss things—one person’s idea can grow and change as other people contribute their ideas. Great ideas become greater; problems are solved.

I have great faith in the human species. With our amazing brains, we have created amazing machines. We can do things today that would have been considered absolutely impossible one hundred years ago—like going to the moon or sending a fax or replacing a diseased bone in a living person with metal or plastic. Sadly, much of our technology, while it may be good for us, is not so good for the environment.

But now that we have begun to understand that wonderful inventions like refrigeration or air conditioning (and many, many, many more) actually release poisons that hurt the environment, we are starting to do something about the problem. We ought to be doing more, but at least we have made a start.

My greatest hope lies in the fact that young people, all around the world, are not only aware of the problems, but actually want to try to help solve them. And because the future of the planet lies in the hands of today’s and tomorrow’s youth, I decided I wanted to do my share of trying to help you to help the world. My way of helping was to start Roots & Shoots. Maybe you have heard of it? Maybe you have already joined? It’s very new. It began with one small group of high school students in Dar es Salaam in 1991. It only really got going—in the United States and Europe—in 1993.















The author and her Roots & Shoots friends in Connecticut.



It is called Roots & Shoots because roots move gradually under the ground to make a firm foundation, and shoots seem small and weak, but to reach the light they can break open brick walls. The brick walls are all the problems we have been talking about. The roots and shoots are you and your friends and young people all around the world. Hundreds and thousands of roots and shoots can solve the problems, change the world, and make it a better place to live.

The most important thing I can say to you—yes, you who are now reading this—is that you, as an individual, have a role to play and can make a difference. You get to choose: do you want to use your life to try to make the world a better place for humans and animals and the environment? Or not?

Most people suffer from what I call “Just-meism.” What is that? Well, say you leave the tap running while you clean your teeth, or leave the house with a light burning, or drop a piece of litter and can’t be bothered to pick it up. You know that all those things are wrong, but so what? What difference can it possibly make, you say to yourself. There are millions of people in the world, and I’m just me. How can it matter if I leave one little tap running, one little light burning, one little piece of litter on the road? And anyway, no one will know. Of course, it wouldn’t matter if there were just a few people in the world. But just think of all the millions of people all saying to themselves: It doesn’t matter, it’s just me. And, anyway, no one knows.

Millions of gallons of water wasted, millions of lights burning, millions of pieces of litter, much of it harmful. See what I mean?

Roots & Shoots clubs or groups are now in more than fifteen countries. Members decide how they can best make the world around them better for the environment, for nonhuman animals, for one another, and for their communities. The activities will be different in different places. It may make a big difference to your particular environment if you and your group plant trees. Or it may be more important to start or improve a recycling program, or collect trash. Perhaps you can best contribute to animal welfare by learning about their behavior and sharing what you have found out—by speaking, writing, painting. Or there may be a need for enthusiastic and reliable volunteers in your shelter. Your best contribution to the well-being of the human community in your area may be collecting clothes for the homeless, visiting kids in the hospital, or sharing your knowledge and ideas with disadvantaged kids in primary school.

Do you think you help to make the world a better place when you cause a sad or crosspatchy person to smile? When you make a dog wag his or her tail? When you water a drooping and thirsty plant? One cheered-up person, one happy dog, one thriving plant. And you. That’s what Roots & Shoots is all about: the value and importance of each individual, human and nonhuman.

My life today—a very great deal of it—is spent in airplanes, rushing from one country to another, raising money, talking to groups of people, and starting Roots & Shoots in schools. It gets pretty exhausting. I hate my suitcases, packing, unpacking. Ironing—I hate ironing. But it is all made more than worthwhile because of the amazing people I meet all over the place.

Let me tell you about “Blinky” Rodriguez. Blinky is an ex-champion kick-boxer. One of his sons was killed in a gang drive-by shooting in Los Angeles. Blinky wanted revenge. But when he went into the courtroom and saw the three young men who had been arrested for the killing, he seemed to hear a voice that said, “Blinky, if you care about yourself and the rest of your family, you must forgive.”

Well, it wasn’t easy for him, as you can imagine. But somehow he managed to stop wanting to kill his son’s murderers. Then he began to think about all the gang violence in his part of the city and all the young people killed for no good reason. He began talking to the Latino gang leaders of the neighborhoods, and he persuaded seventy-five of them to sign a peace treaty. One year later there had been only one murder involving members of those seventy-five gangs—compared with between forty and fifty killings in each of the previous two years. Blinky sure made a difference!

Then there is Gary Haun. He lost his sight when he was flying a helicopter for the U.S. Marines. When I first met Gary he seemed to look me in the eye as we talked. I watched him perform extraordinarily good magic, with cards, to a group of kids. Although I knew he was blind, I felt sure he could see something—at least light and dark. But he is, in fact, one-hundred-percent blind. It is just that he has learned to overcome what he calls his “blindisms.” He does skydiving and cross-country skiing and jogging, and he plays golf. Most important, he is a great guy, with a great sense of humor.

There are, without doubt, many perfectly ordinary-seeming people in your community who have terrible problems, but who manage to seem cheerful and can make you smile. Yet they have every right to complain and moan. If you know some of them, send me their stories so I can share them, too. And tell me, incidentally, about you. What are you doing to make the world a better place?

I try to spend as much time as I can at Gombe. It makes me sad that I can only get there for such short visits. But then I think how lucky I have been. I spent years and years doing what I wanted to do most of all—being with wild, free chimpanzees in the forest. Now is my paying-back time—trying to repay the chimpanzees and the forest for all the wonderful time I have spent with them. As I have said, I feel I can do that best by sharing my discoveries and my thoughts with as many people as possible. With you, for example, so that you understand some of the problems the chimps and the wild places face and can help to solve them.

I was in the Gombe area for one of our Wildlife Awareness Weeks, showing the local people some of the wonders of chimpanzee life. We always have a

lovely display of objects used by chimps as tools. We now know they use different objects for different purposes wherever they have been studied in Africa, so we can talk about chimpanzee cultures. We exhibit photos and show a video of all sorts of chimpanzee behaviors, and there is a big section on the dangers of deforestation, overgrazing, and overpopulation. More than three thousand schoolchildren visited, mostly walking for miles to get there.

During the week there were two days especially for groups of Roots & Shoots from the surrounding schools. The members performed plays and dances and sang songs, all with environmental and wildlife messages. They were outstanding! The walls of the exhibition hall were covered with paintings and drawings, all with animal or environmental messages, made by Roots & Shoots members from different parts of Africa.

A highlight of the week was the official opening of one of our most exciting projects, TACARE, a Tanzanian reforestation, conservation, and education program. It is funded by the European Union, and we hope to try to reforest the hills and mountains along the shores of Lake Tanganyika, helping the people to live in better harmony with nature. Except for the ten miles of Gombe shoreline, the hills along much of the lake have lost all their trees. Soon, unless things change, the people will starve.
















The author encouraging young people to plant trees in Africa.



TACARE offers to help villagers set up nurseries so that they can grow their own trees to replace those that have been cut down. The villagers are delighted, and the project seems to be working. Already there are nurseries in twelve villages along the lake. Of course, Roots & Shoots is a very important part of the project. Soon we expect there will be clubs in all of
the twelve villages.

Playing an important part in the week were the Gombe field staff. These men know so much about the chimps. They loved being there as part of the exhibit, talking to the children about the chimps, their behavior, and their food. There is no way there will be hunting and poaching at Gombe so long as we have the money to pay our field staff.

Although the chimps who used to live in the forests all along the lake shore have gone, along with the trees that were their home, the chimpanzees of Gombe are safe. When I go to visit them I can escape into the forest world I know so well and love so much. It’s a world of entwined branches, soft colors in shades of brown and green and yellow. I always get new strength from the forest and also a sense of peace that I can take with me, back into the hurly-burly of the lecture-tour world.

My last Gombe visit was only for a week, but what a wonderful seven days. Of course, I saw Fifi and most of her family and many of the other Kasakela community chimps. Then I went to the beautiful Mitumba Valley

in the north of the park, where all those years ago I first watched chimps in the big Msalula tree. This valley is in the range of the Mitumba community. Their boss is a splendid male whom we named Cusano (for Marc Cusano who, you remember, was rescued by Old Man).

Four months before my visit a very exciting thing had happened in this community—one of the females gave birth to twins! This is only the second time in all the thirty-five years of our research we have been able to observe twins. The first pair of twins, born twenty years ago to Melissa, were undersize and weak from birth, especially one of them. Melissa never seemed to have enough milk for two babies, so we were not surprised when the weak one died at the age of ten months.

I was thrilled to see that these new twins, a male and a female, were strong and healthy. If anything, they are large for their age, and they are absolutely the most beautiful babies. Their mother is calm and amazingly clever at carrying around two infants. She is called Rafiki, which means friend in Kiswahili. We have named the twins Roots and Shoots! The male is Roots —or Rootsi, as he will be known. He has a wonderful thick white beard. In fact he looks just like David Greybeard must have looked as a baby. Shootsi, the female, has just a few little white hairs on her chin. Both have alert faces with great wondering brown eyes. They are very active and very curious. Often I saw them come face-to-face, stare for a moment, then touch lips, kissing each other. We are all praying that they will both survive.

















Rafiki with her twins, Rootsi and Shootsi. Photograph by Stephen Patch, © The Jane Goodall Institute.



That evening I sat on the beach, watching the sun sink down behind the mountains of Zaire on the opposite shore of Lake Tanganyika. It looked so peaceful, yet I knew that over there were hunters, noting where chimpanzees made their nests so they could shoot them at first light. Suppose Fifi and little Ferdinand lived over there. Or Rafiki and her twins. I thought of the six pathetic little infant chimps who were confiscated in Kigoma from Zairian hunters the previous year. Four of them are still alive, and soon they will move into a big sanctuary. But they are undersize, and you can see the sadness in their eyes. We do our best to make them happy, but they have lost their freedom and they have lost their mothers.

Not far from Kigoma is a refugee camp where people have fled from the violence in the little neighboring country of Rwanda. There are many human orphans there, children who have watched their parents killed.

How do we help make the world a better place for all the hurting, desperate people and animals? The only way is for each of us to do what we can in our own little neck of the woods. Here is one last story. It is about a man called Rick Swope. He is a truck driver. Once every year he takes his family, his wife and three little girls, to the zoo. In this zoo lives a chimpanzee called Jojo.

Jojo was born in Africa. When he was about two years old his mother was shot and he was sent to North America to a zoo. For some years he lived with a little female called Susie, but then the zoo director sold her to another zoo and Jojo was left alone. This was very cruel, although maybe the director didn’t understand.

For the next eight years or so Jojo lived in a small cell with steel bars and a cement floor. Then the zoo raised lots of money to build a huge enclosure. They bought nineteen other chimps. They introduced them all to one another, and then they let them out into their new home. The chimps couldn’t escape because there was a moat filled with water around the enclosure. Chimps don’t swim.

After a while a fight broke out. One of the new males challenged Jojo. Well, Jojo didn’t know anything about fighting. How could he? He’d lived all those years alone. In his fear he rushed into the moat. He didn’t know anything about water, either, except as something to drink, from a cup.

In his fright he scrambled over the safety barrier that had been put there to stop chimps drowning in the deep water beyond. He disappeared under the surface, came up gasping for breath, and vanished again. Twice more he surfaced, and then he was gone. There were only some decreasing ripples on the surface of the moat.

On the other side of the water was a little group of people, including a keeper. He knew Jojo weighed 130 pounds. He knew male chimps can be dangerous. He just stood and watched. But luckily for Jojo, that was the day for Rick Swope to be at the zoo.

Rick jumped in. The keeper tried to stop him, but Rick pulled away. He swam about in the murky water, feeling for Jojo, then managed to heave the limp, heavy body onto his shoulder. Somehow he scrambled over the safety barrier. He pushed Jojo onto the bank and turned to go back to his wife and kids. They were really scared.

Suddenly Rick’s family and the keeper began yelling at him to hurry. Why? Because charging down the bank towards Rick were four of the big adult

males. Hair bristling. Teeth gleaming as they screamed. Rick was a stranger —perhaps the four males thought he was hurting Jojo.

Rick paused. He saw the four males looking enormous as they charged down toward him. He also saw that Jojo was sliding back into the water. The bank was too steep.

For a moment Rick stood there. He looked back at his frightened family. He looked up at the four males. He looked down at Jojo vanishing into the moat, and he went back to Jojo.

He pushed him up out of the water again and stayed there to stop him from sliding back. The four males did nothing. They stopped and watched. After a few minutes Jojo raised his head, and some water came from his mouth. He staggered to his feet, took a few steps, and lay to rest where the ground was level.

Rick saved Jojo’s life. The whole incident was captured on tape by a woman who happened to have a video camera with her. That evening her piece of film was shown on the networks across North America. The director of my institute saw it and he called Rick.

“That was a very brave thing you did, Mr. Swope. You knew it was dangerous—everyone was telling you so. Whatever made you do it?”

“Well,” said Rick, “I happened to look into Jojo’s eyes, and it was like looking into the eyes of a man. And the message was: Won’t anybody help me?”

Well, that is the message I have seen in the eyes of little chimps for sale in the markets, and looking out from under the frills of the circus costumes, and from the grim prisons of the medical research labs. It is the look I have seen in the eyes of so many suffering animals, and in the eyes of the little children whose parents were killed in Burundi, and in the eyes of inner-city kids, terrified by gang violence, not knowing how to escape. I see the look, I hear the message, I have to try to help.















Rootsi’s future is in our hands. Photograph by Stephen Patch, © The Jane Goodall Institute.



It is a look that you, too, can often see in the eyes of those around you, human and nonhuman alike. Once you listen to the message in your heart, you, too, will want to help.

That is our hope. Because if we all start listening and helping, then surely, together, we can make the world a better place for all living things. Can’t we?



About this Title




This eBook was created using ReaderWorks™ Publisher Preview, produced by OverDrive, Inc.




For more information on ReaderWorks, visit us on the Web at "www.readerworks.com"

OceanofPDF.com


Copyright © 1988, 2000 by Byron Preiss Visual Publications, Inc.

Text copyright © 1988, 1996 by Jane Goodall

Photographs of the Goodall family copyright © 1988, 1996 by Jane Goodall.

Cover photograph copyright © National Geographic Society




All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information address Pocket Books, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020




Original ISBN: 0-671-56271-1

eISBN: 1-588-24031-2




A MINSTREL BOOK and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon & Schuster Inc.




“My Life” is a trademark of Byron Preiss Visual Publications, Inc.




This text converted to eBook format for the Adobe EPUB.
